=== Paper 1711.02639v1 (alphaxiv full) ===

On the Virtues of Automated QSAR  The New Kid on the Block
Marcelo T. de Oliveira*
1,2
, Edson Katekawa
2
1 Instituto de Química de São Carlos, Universidade de São Paulo, Avenida Trabalhador são-carlense
400, São Carlos, SP 13566-590, Brazil
2 Instituto de Física de São Carlos, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil
*Author for correspondence: mtavareso@usp.br
Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship (QSAR) has proved an invaluable tool in medicinal
chemistry. Data availability at unprecedented levels through various databases have collaborated to a
resurgence in the interest for QSAR. In this context, rapid generation of quality predictive models is highly
desirable for hit identification and lead optimization. We showcase the application of an automated QSAR
approach, which randomly selects multiple training/test sets and utilizes machine-learning algorithms to
generate predictive models. Results demonstrate that AutoQSAR produces models of improved or
similar quality to those generated by practitioners in the field but in just a fraction of the time. Despite the
potential of the concept to the benefit of the community, the AutoQSAR opportunity has been largely
undervalued.
Keywords: Automated QSAR • kernel PLS • prediction • QSAR • validation

Background
Hansch’s seminal publication on the correlation of partition coefficients and biological activity
evaluating the effect of substituents through the application of straightforward regression methods laid
the foundations of the field we recognize as Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship (QSAR) [1-2].
Over half a century later and thousands of papers disclosing applications in numerous areas including
medicinal chemistry, [3-5] environmental, [6-9] food, [10-12] and material [13-16] sciences, as well as
regulatory [17-19] across academy, industry, and government, QSAR has proved an invaluable tool for
experts and non-experts alike in identifying patterns in datasets and assisting in the process of making
quantitative predictions [20-21]. In drug discovery, QSAR represents a ligand-based method, which
generates models by building relationships between structural information or properties for a set of
compounds and related experimental data of interest (e.g., biological activity) as the target property [22-
23]. These models have been particularly useful to lead optimization [24].
As in any field, QSAR has experienced highs and lows through its history. In the context of well-
established structure-based methods such as molecular docking enjoying the spotlight, a major review
presented the provocative question ‘QSAR Modeling: Where have you been?’, as part of the title [25].
From another downside perspective, there are skeptical critics who deem QSAR models as plain black
boxes carrying no ability to promote creative drug design [26]. Nonetheless, as we witness the recent
explosion of medicinal chemistry information filling databases of public domain in the era of ‘big data’,
one can easily understand the current resurgence in the interest for QSAR after years of dominance of
structure-based approaches [27].
Developments in QSAR have been constant since its early days. Despite the abundance of data
becoming available and easy access to sizeable collections for prospective studies, practitioners have
been creating models essentially in the same manner as 30 or more years ago. After curating a learning
set of interest, a typical QSAR routine starts with the computation of descriptors followed by splitting the
dataset into training and test sets, which then allows construction of QSAR models; and as a final step,
validation of generated models. As access to large datasets has become commonplace and descriptors
are usually readily computed, one can turn attention to the next couple steps, which represent
bottlenecks in the process. Considering the many variables brought into play, manual selection of best
training and test sets is a laborious process as a myriad of configurations are possible. Additionally,
QSAR models can be created following a variety of methods leading to a vast number of possible results,
which would further stretch the workload. Practitioners would largely benefit from automation of both
tasks resulting in a massive reduction of the time necessary to achieve end-result models following
random selection of training/test sets and various built-in algorithms to generate a range of models.
Automated QSAR has been in the making for quite a few years. While searching for QSAR as a
keyword returns over 15,000 hits (articles and reviews, only) at Web of Science (Figure 1), AutoQSAR
or “automated QSAR” produces just a handful entries (as late June, 2017) [28-31]. Early references to
preliminary automated QSAR efforts appeared in the 2000s [32-37]. A major contribution arrived in 2011

when an AstraZeneca’s team reported their experience related to the continuous update of QSAR
models for in-house ever-growing compound collections [31].
Figure 1. QSAR and AutoQSAR publications over the years.
To date, however, AutoQSAR has attracted only scant attention from the community. In contrast,
there are quite a few applications currently available running automated QSAR protocols including (but
not only): AstraZeneca’s AutoQSAR [29], AutoQSAR [38,39], Auto-Modeller [40], QSAR workbench [31],
and VLifeAutoQSAR [41]. Among web-based services, we mention OCHEM [42] database and
ChemModLab [43]. They all offer a rapid and simplified QSAR solution just a few clicks away to a range
of models skipping iterative steps that require some statistical dexterity to the benefit especially of non-
experts. AutoQSAR applications basically differ on descriptors automatically computed and methods
(e.g., decision trees, PLS, random forests) available to generate models.
For this exercise, we applied an AutoQSAR module introduced to Schrödinger’s Small-Molecule
Drug Discovery suite early last year [38]. Instead of considering a single model derived from a single
training set, AutoQSAR randomly selects combinations of training and test sets (75% and 25%,
respectively, on default mode) distributing data following the same pattern for the learning set. Then, it
computes 497 physicochemical and topological descriptors as well as 2D fingerprints (dendritic, linear,
MOLPRINT2D, or radial) through the Canvas module. These are used in combination with machine-
learning methods (Bayes, KPLS, MLR, PCR, PLS, and RP) available to build various predictive models.
Among these, only Bayes and KPLS apply both descriptors and fingerprints. To rank models on the basis
of merit, which is critical to any AutoQSAR scheme, the module offers a robust score function that
evaluates each model in respect to its accuracy in relation to training and test sets. That is, r
2
and q
2
,
respectively, are taken into account (Figure 2).

Figure 2. QSAR workflow highlighting AutoQSAR steps of selecting training/test sets and model
generation.
Automated QSAR in action
To build the case of AutoQSAR, we set out to generate QSAR predictive models from published
datasets. We aimed to compare results generated in our group using AutoQSAR (unpublished data from
the authors) to models available in the literature produced using traditional approaches. Dixon and co-
workers [39] recently reported the analysis of AutoQSAR models comparing to their previously published
results using machine-learning methods [44]. Herein, we analyse AutoQSAR results in relation to QSAR
models from various research groups. We were particularly interested in confronting the quality of both
models and evaluate the time required using the AutoQSAR approach. Towards these goals, we chose
7 examples illustrating typical applications of QSAR in the early stages of drug discovery when searching
for a hit or lead compound. Such cases represent the majority of QSAR publications in the medicinal
chemistry literature. The selection includes from a single series of compounds to a few classes for the
same target. Learning sets varied from 35 to 255 compounds for a defined biochemical target (in
parenthesis) related to the following diseases: Alzheimer’s (hBACE1) [45], asthma (CRTh2) [46],
cardiovascular (ABHD6) [47], Chagas’ (cruzain) [48], diabetes (PTP1B) [49], malaria (PfDHODH) [50],
and schistosomiasis (SmTGR) [51]. All examples represent recent and validated models. It is noteworthy
that half examples initially selected had an issue (e.g., clarity, duplicates, typographic mistakes) that
ruled out its use for the present study.
AutoQSAR protocol was applied to the datasets above to select test and training sets. Models
were produced at training sets 70 to 80% of the dataset at 1% intervals; and 99 models were built at
each interval. Maximum pair correlation was set to 0.99 while other parameters were kept as default. In
selecting best AutoQSAR model from the many produced, we used the highest score as main criteria
followed by Q
2
(R
2
for the test set). Q
2
values were compared to R
2
pred
from literature examples. Most
AutoQSAR models (5/7) showed a substantial improvement in the predictive power. For instance,

asthma’s CRTh2 original model produced R
2
pred
value of 0.64 while AutoQSAR Q
2
value was 0.88 (Figure
3). Models related to a couple of learning sets (Chagas’ and HIV) had similar predictive capacity.
AutoQSAR underperformed in comparison to the original model and only slightly in just one case
(schistosomiasis’ SmTGR), R
2
pred
0.96 versus Q
2
0.90. Nonetheless, we obtained a much simpler
AutoQSAR solution with fewer components (N=2) than in the original model (N=6) [28]. Interestingly, all
best models obtained here were invariably a KPLS-related solution. The main advantage of AutoQSAR
methods, however, is the time necessary to generate a collection of models even on a basic consumer-
grade desktop as in our case. Times provided represent wall times, which varied according to the size
of the learning set from 18 to 97 min; and 40 min as average (Figure 3). Even malaria (PfDHODH) as
the largest dataset had calculations for all models completed in less than a day (ca. 19 h). That
represents a dramatic reduction when compared to the many days or weeks on end of worktime to
generate a single or just a few models for a learning set.

Figure 3. Predicted and simulated pIC
50
versus experimental pIC
50
for best generated model.
Training and test sets are identified. Values of Q
2
, R
2
, R
2
pred
, and times to generate models are also
provided. Note that all best models were KPLS (left). Training and test set distribution after AutoQSAR
as well as experimental dataset distribution (right). *R
2
pred
was unavailable for cardiovascular (ABHD6);
value provided was calculated from the original reference.

Figure 3 (continued). Predicted and simulated pIC
50
versus experimental pIC
50
for best generated
model. Training and test sets are identified. Values of Q
2
, R
2
, R
2
pred
, and times to generate models are
also provided. Note that all best models were KPLS (left). Training and test set distribution after
AutoQSAR as well as experimental dataset distribution (right). *R
2
pred
was unavailable for diabetes
(PTP1B); value provided was calculated from the original reference.

Conclusion & Future Perspectives
Traditionally, creation of high-quality QSAR models has required significant expertise
and being labor intensive. Following best practices, AutoQSAR approaches democratizes
creation and application of QSAR models through automation. Bearing in mind these clear
advantages, the obvious question about the reasons why automated QSAR protocols have
not been more adopted beyond the handful examples aforementioned remains unanswered.
Perhaps AutoQSAR is too recent and a great deal of the community have not had the
opportunity to try it out for themselves; or even that is it unheard of by many as we have
noticed among colleagues. Cumming and co-workers [52], in 2013, went further to offer the
bold argument to which we agree that the community lacks confidence in the capacity of
machines to produce models ‒ similar or better than those built by experts in the field.
Therefore, implying it is a case of a psychological barrier to be overcome. Beyond
controversies and differences of opinion regarding QSAR, we offer our AutoQSAR experience
based on the bit of ‘taste’ we have had for the past few months. For its considerable benefits,
it is clear to us that it is a powerful tool. If only appreciated, automated QSAR protocols have
huge potential for various applications considering speeding up quality model generation, thus
facilitating tackling with confidence increasingly larger datasets by QSAR experts and non-
experts alike.
Financial & competing interests disclosure
This work was supported by the State of São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP,
Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo), grant 2013/07600-3. E.K.
acknowledges financial support provided by FAPESP, grant 2014/50623-7. M.T.O
acknowledges the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES,
Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior) for research grant. E.K. is
an employee at Chemyunion Ltda, Sorocaba, São Paulo, Brazil. The authors have no other
affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest or
financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript from those
disclosed.
No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript.

Executive summary
QSAR in medicinal chemistry
• QSAR has long been used in ligand-based drug discovery efforts to generate predictive
models to assist in the identification of hit compounds and lead optimization.
• Through the decades, QSAR has faced criticism for inadequacies in assisting in drug
design.
• There has been a resurgence in interest in QSAR due to data availability at
unprecedented levels.
The Automated QSAR opportunity
• Model generation using QSAR has been done essentially in the same manner for the past
30 years or so.
• In the era of ‘big data’, automation of tasks enabling data crunching to identify patterns is
highly desirable. Automation efforts in QSAR has been described since 2000s.
• Automated QSAR workflows assist in model generation by identifying training and test
sets as well as producing various models using machine-learning methods.
• As shown herein, AutoQSAR produces models of similar or improved quality to those
generated by experts using traditional approaches but in a fraction of the time.
Conclusion
• Considering the limited number of publications, we argue that not many users are aware
of the automated QSAR opportunity or have tried it for themselves. Scepticism that
machines could outperform practitioners may also explain this trend.
• Automated QSAR protocols would be particularly useful to tackle large datasets or
systems which requires construction of various models in

[... truncated ...]
