=== Paper 2109.13918v1 (alphaxiv full) ===

Toxicity of Carbon Nanomaterials
Arpita Adhikari
1 
and Joydip Sengupta
2*
1
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Techno Main Salt Lake,
Kolkata, India
2
Department of Electronic Science, Jogesh Chandra Chaudhuri College, Kolkata, India
* 
Corresponding author, E-mail: joydipdhruba@gmail.com
The outstanding multidisciplinary applicability of nanomaterials has paved the path for the
rapid advancement of nanoscience during the last few decades. Such technological progress
subsequently results in an inevitable environmental exposure of nanomaterials. Presently,
nanomaterials are employed in an extensive range of commercial products. Safe and
sustainable incorporation of nanomaterials in industrial products requires a profound and
comprehensive understanding of their potential toxicity. Among different nanomaterials,
carbon nanomaterials marked its notable superiority towards the development of state-of-art
nanotechnology due to the significant contribution of each of the carbon allotropes with
varied dimensionality. The zero-dimensional fullerene, one-dimensional carbon nanotube and
two-dimensional graphene possess an exclusive combination of distinctive properties that are
utilized in most of the nanotechnology-based products nowadays. However, potential risk
factors are associated with the production as well as the use of carbon nanomaterials.
Consequently, the number of studies regarding the assessment of the toxicity of these
nanomaterials has increased rapidly in the past decade. This chapter will summarize the
recent scientific efforts on the toxicity evaluation of different carbon nanomaterials.

Keywords: Toxicity; Carbon nanomaterials, Fullerene, Carbon nanotube, Graphene.
1. Introduction
In 1959 the idea of manipulating and controlling things on a small scale was first introduced
by Richard P. Feynman
1 
and later in 1974, Norio Taniguchi, a professor of Tokyo University
of Science first introduced the term “nanotechnology”
2
. Since then nanotechnology finds its
application in all commercial sectors like medical 
3 , 4 
, fire safety 
5 
, food industry 
6 
,
transportation 
7 
, agriculture 
8 
, electrical transformers 
9 
, oil and gas industry 
10 
, renewable
energies
11 
etc. According to a study performed by Vance et al.
12
, the use of nanotechnology-
based products has increased rapidly in recent times and is expected to elevate in future in the
perspective of more discoveries associated with the unique features of new nanomaterials
(Fig 1).
Fig 1. Material, dimension and surface properties of nanoparticles govern their
characteristics and applications
13
.

However, as the famous proverb says “Every light has its shadow”, likewise, the excessive
use of nanotechnology enhances the probability of exposure of nanomaterials towards
mankind. There exist several potential routes of human exposure to nanomaterials such as
ingestion, inhalation, injection and skin absorption
14 
(Fig.2a). This enforces the scientists
around the globe to research upon the effect of exposure of nanomaterials since way back in
the 1990s
15 
which consequently coined new terms like nanotoxicology
16 
and nanotoxicity
17 
to
be evolved in 2004 and 2005, respectively. Till now the nanotoxicity of different
materials 
18 , 19 20 , 21 
had been examined to explore the impact of their physico-chemical
characteristics on the nanoparticle-biological system (Fig.2b).

(a) (b)
Fig 2. (a) Potential routes of exposure, translocation and deposition sites of nanomaterials
22
.
(b)Impact of physico-chemical characteristics on nanoparticle-biological system
interaction.
23
Among different nanomaterials, carbon nanomaterials are revolutionary due to the unique and
significant utilization of each of the allotrope. Thus within the scope of the book, the toxicity
of carbon nanomaterials will be discussed in this chapter.
2. Carbon Nanomaterials
Carbon, placed at group 14 (IV A), can form sp
3 
and sp
2 
hybrids and stable multiple pi and
sigma bonds which in-turn help it to configure its nano-allotropes like fullerene, carbon

nanotube and graphene (Fig 3a and 3b). All of these nano-allotropes possess great promises
in finding applications in different potential sectors (Fig 3c)
24
.
(a)
(b)
Carbon Nanomaterials
Fullerene
Carbon
Nanotube
Graphene and Graphene
Derivatives

(c)
Fig.3. (a) Different carbon nanomaterials and (b) their structures
25
,(c) Different potential
application sectors of carbon nanomaterials
26
.
2.1 Fullerene
In 1985 Kroto et al.
27 
discovered a nearly spherical closed cage molecule having 60 numbers
of carbon atoms and named then buckminsterfullerene. Structurally, C
60 
is a type of polygon
called truncated icosahedron, comprised of 60 vertices and 32 faces (12 pentagons and 20

hexagons)
28
. The C
60 
molecule possesses high symmetry with numerous transformations each
one of which maps the molecule onto itself
29
. A class of water-soluble, oxidized fullerenes,
are termed as fullerols or fullerenols. Fullerene can be synthesised by laser vaporization
method
30
, resistive and inductive heating
31
, arc discharge
32
, pyrolysis
33
or combustion/ flame
synthesis
34
. There are various prospective application areas of fullerene such as fuel cells
35
,
biology
36 
and medicine
37
, organic photovoltaics/solar cells
38 
etc.
2.2 Carbon Nanotube
Radushkevich and Lukyanovich
39 
observed a tubular carbon nanostructure in 1952 which
was later termed as the carbon nanotube. However, this observation remained unnoticed by
the researchers for a few decades. In 1991 Iijima
40 
reported the observation of CNTs in the
Nature journal, which created global interest and excitement. Structurally, CNT is a rolled-up
sheet of carbon atoms that forms the tube structure where the number of sheets may be one
(single-wall carbon nanotube or SWCNT) or more (multi-walled carbon nanotube or
MWCNT)
41
. The difference in roll-up direction gives rise to different structures of SWCNTs
such as zigzag, armchair or chiral
42
. MWCNT can be viewed as either a single sheet of
carbon, rolled-in around itself multiple times (Parchment model) or multiple layers of
graphitic sheets rolled-in on themselves (Swiss roll). CNTs can be produced primarily via
laser ablation
43
, arc discharge
44 
or chemical vapor deposition
45 
methods. There are several
possible application areas of CNT such as wearable electronics
46
, flat panel display
47
, solar
cell
48
, sensor
49
, textile industry
50
, Li-ion battery
51
, and even in stimuli-responsive material
52
.
2.3 Graphene and Graphene Derivatives
In 1962, first experimental observation of single layer of graphite was reported by Boehm et
al.
53 
and in 1994 he named the single layer of graphite as “Graphene” 
54
. In 2004, the report
of the observation of graphene by Novoselov et al.
55 
in Science journal fostered a huge

interest in graphene among the global researchers. Structurally, graphene is one atom thick
two-dimensional allotrope of carbon, consisting of a single sheet of sp
2 
hybridised carbon
atoms. Graphene can be synthesised using exfoliation methods 
56 , 57 
, pyrolysis 
58 
, arc
discharge
59
, epitaxial growth on SiC
60 
or chemical vapour deposition
61
. Graphene oxide (GO)
is produced by the exfoliation of graphite oxide and can be chemically reduced at a later stage
to synthesise graphene. As complete reduction cannot be achieved, the end material is called
‘reduced graphene oxide’ (rGO). Graphene has a gigantic possibility for applications in
different sectors such as energy storage
62
, flexible electronics
63
, aerospace
64 
and biomedical
65
applications.
3. Nanotoxicology and Resulting Cytotoxicity or Cellular Toxicity
Nanotoxicology is the branch of biological science which aims to measure the degree to
which nanomaterials can cause a hazard to human health (Fig 4). The large surface area-to-
volume ratio and tiny size (which gives rise to quantum size effects) of nanomaterials along
with environmental factors collectively result in biological changes which widely differs
from those caused by their larger counterparts and ultimately cause toxicity. Nanotoxicity can
be measured in various ways; however, the primary measurement that needs to be performed
is cytotoxicity.

Fig 4. Pathways of exposure of the human body to nanoparticles, affected organs, and
associated diseases
66
.
Cytotoxicity or Cellular toxicity is defined as the potential of a material to cause cell death.
For an exact evaluation of cytotoxicity, information about cell origin, cell concentration, drug
concentration and treatment tenure require special attention. There are various underlying
mechanisms of cytotoxicity, namely, reactive oxygen species 
67 
(ROS), cell autophagy 
68 
,
pyroptosis
69
, apoptosis
70 
and necrosis
71 
(Fig 5).

Fig 5. Various underlying mechanisms of cytotoxicity.
ROS is a group of oxidative species (Table 1) which are produced intrinsically or
extrinsically within the cell. ROS are mostly produced as by-products at the time of
mitochondrial electron transport. Additionally, metal-catalyzed oxidation reactions also
generate ROS as an essential intermediate. Abundant ROS have the potential to impair
biological responses leading to oxidative stress. Excessive toxic levels of oxidative stress can
cause electron transfer chain dysfunction along with mitochondrial membrane damage
resulting in cell death (Fig 6a).
Reactive Oxygen Species Mechanism of Generation
Superoxide (O
−
2
)
Reduction of molecular oxygen in the
electron transport chain of mitochondria, and
other enzymatic routes: monooxygenase,
NADPH oxidase, xanthine oxidase
Hydrogen peroxide (H
2
O
2
) 
Converted from O
−
2 
by enzyme superoxide
dismutase (SOD)
Hydroxyl radical (
•
OH) 
Produced in Haber-Weiss reaction from
O
−
2 
and H
2
O
2
Singlet oxygen (
1
O
2
) 
Produced in the reaction of hypochlorous
acid (HOCl) and H
2
O
2
Peroxynitrite (ONOO
−
) Produced in the reaction of nitric oxide (NO)
Nanotoxicity Mechanisms
Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS)
Cell Autophagy
Pyroptosis
Apoptosis
Necrosis

and (O
−
2
)
Table 1. Production pathways of Reactive Oxygen Species
72
.
Autophagy constitutes the processes of autophagosome synthesis and lysosomal degradation
(Fig 6b). Under stressed conditions, reduced lysosomal activity may increase autophagosome
synthesis, thus processing of excessive autophagosomes will be reduced due to the rate-
limiting lysosomal activity. The formation/accumulation of uncontrolled autophagosomes,
which are unfused to lysosomes, leads to autophagy and directly induces cellular toxicity.
The term ‘Pyroptosis’ originated from the Greek words “pyro” and “ptosis” which mean
‘fever/inflammation’, and ‘to fall’ respectively. It is a kind of regulated cell death caused by
inflammatory stimuli, transduced via inflammatory caspases and executed by gasdermins.
Inflammatory caspases include CASP-1, CASP-4/-5 (human), and CASP-11 (murine) (Fig
6c).
In multi-cellular organisms, the unwanted cells (not needed or threat to the organism) are
abolished by a controlled cell suicide procedure known as apoptosis (originated from the
Greek word which means “falling off,” as leaves from a tree). Proteolytic enzymes (caspases)
mediate apoptosis and initiate cell death via cleaving specific proteins in
the cytoplasm and nucleus. The members of B-cell lymphoma 2 and Inhibitors of apoptosis
protein families regulate the activation process of caspase. (Fig 6d).
Necrosis (originated from the Greek word which means "death") is a type of cell injury which
causes premature cell death in living tissue via autolysis (Fig 6e). It is caused by external (to

cell or tissue) factors namely trauma, infection, or toxins and leads to the unregulated
digestion of cell components.
(a)

(b)
(c)

(d)
(e)

Fig. 6. (a) Effect of reactive oxygen species in cells.
73 
(b) Mechanisms of nanomaterial-
induced autophagy activation 
74 
. Pathways leading to cell death 
75 
: (c) pyroptosis, (d)
apoptosis, and (e) necrosis.
The cytotoxicity of carbon-based nanomaterials influenced by physical and chemical
properties of carbon nanomaterials
76
(Fig 7), surface modification of nanomaterials
77
, and
metal impurities
78
.
(a)
(b)

Fig.7. (a) Different physicochemical characteristics of nanomaterials, responsible for their
toxicological activity
79
. (b) Cytotoxicity initiation mechanisms of a nanoparticle
80
.
4. Assessment of Nano- cytotoxicity
Now cytotoxicity can be assessed by examining the toxicity in different organs of the human
body. This section aims to review the cytotoxic effects of carbon nanomaterials in different
organs of the human body (Fig 8).
Fig 8. Nanotoxicity assessment pathways.
4.1 Respiratory or Pulmonary Toxicity
An aggregated form of underivatized C
60 
and a fully derivatized, highly water-soluble
derivative of C
60 
was used to study the pulmonary toxicity on rats by Sayes et al.
81
. However,
no adverse effects on lung tissue were reported. Two different sized (nano and micro)
fullerene aggregates were used by Sayers et al.
82 
to study respiratory toxicity in mice and
lung inflammatory responses were observed. Morimoto et al. 
83 
also studied inhalation
Nanotoxicity
Assesment
Respiratory or Pulmonary toxicity
Dermal or Skin toxicity
Cardiovascular toxicity
Reproductive and Developmental toxicity
Hepatotoxicity or Liver toxicity
Ocular Toxicity

exposure as well as intratracheal instillation effects of fullerene on rats and their result
showed that well-dispersed fullerenes did not cause any neutrophil inflammation.
CNT mediated pulmonary toxicity can occur via inflammation, injury, fibrosis, and
pulmonary tumors. Park et al.
84 
treated mice with MWCNTs by intratracheal instillation and
observed allergic and pro-inflammatory responses owing to B cell (B lymphocytes) activation
and production of IgE (Immunoglobulin E). Inoue et al.
85 
examined in-vivo and in-vitro
effects of pulmonary exposure of MWCNT on mice and showed that MWCNT can intensify
allergic airway inflammation with increased humoral immunity and thus has the potential to
cause allergic asthma. The effect of short-term inhalation of the rod-like CNT on mice was
studied by Rydman et al.
86 
and they found that novel natural immunity-mediated allergic-like
airway inflammation was induced in mice by the said exposure. Heish et al.
87 
studied the
potential toxic effects of SWCNT exposure on the respiratory system of mice and found that
intratracheal instillation of SWCNTs could result in an airflow obstruction and airway
hyperreactivity which could consequently lead to irreversible obstructive airway disease. Xu
et al.
88 
reported that the intrapulmonary administration of MWCNTs can induce mesothelial
proliferation which is closely associated with mesothelioma development. It was reported that
myofibroblasts and lung fibrosis can be caused by CNT exposure
89
. Chang et al.
90 
reported
that epithelial-mesenchymal transition results in SWCNT-induced pulmonar

[... truncated ...]