=== Paper 2204.06614v1 (alphaxiv full) ===

Accurate Clinical Toxicity Prediction using Multi-task
Deep Neural Nets and Contrastive Molecular
Explanations
Bhanushee Sharma
1
, Vijil Chenthamarakshan
2
, Amit Dhurandhar
2
, Shiranee Pereira
3
,
James A. Hendler
4
, Jonathan S. Dordick
1, *
, and Payel Das
2, *
1
Chemical and Biological Engineering, RPI, Troy, NY, USA
2
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA
3
People For Animals, Chennai
4
Computer Science, RPI, Troy, NY, USA
*
Corresponding: daspa@us.ibm.com, dordick@rpi.edu
ABSTRACT
Explainable machine learning for molecular toxicity prediction is a promising approach for efficient drug development and
chemical safety. A predictive ML model of toxicity can reduce experimental cost and time while mitigating ethical concerns
by significantly reducing animal and clinical testing. Herein, we use a deep learning framework for simultaneously modeling
in vitro, in vivo, and clinical toxicity data. Two different molecular input representations are used; Morgan fingerprints and
pre-trained SMILES embeddings. A multi-task deep learning model accurately predicts toxicity for all endpoints, including
clinical, as indicated by the area under the Receiver Operator Characteristic curve and balanced accuracy. In particular,
pre-trained molecular SMILES embeddings as input to the multi-task model improved clinical toxicity predictions compared
to existing models in MoleculeNet benchmark. Additionally, our multitask approach is comprehensive in the sense that it is
comparable to state-of-the-art approaches for specific endpoints in in vitro, in vivo and clinical platforms. Through both the
multi-task model and transfer learning, we were able to indicate the minimal need of in vivo data for clinical toxicity predictions.
To provide confidence and explain the model’s predictions, we adapt a post-hoc contrastive explanation method that returns
pertinent positive and negative features, which correspond well to known mutagenic and reactive toxicophores, such as
unsubstituted bonded heteroatoms, aromatic amines, and Michael receptors. Furthermore, toxicophore recovery by pertinent
feature analysis captures more of the in vitro (53%) and in vivo (56%), rather than of the clinical (8%), endpoints, and indeed
uncovers a preference in known toxicophore data towards in vitro and in vivo experimental data. To our knowledge, this is
the first contrastive explanation, using both present and absent substructures, for predictions of clinical and in vivo molecular
toxicity.
Toxicity remains a major driver of drug candidate failure in drug development, resulting in the high cost of drugs that make
it into the market
1, 2
. This phenomenon has persisted despite the surge in new chemical entities (NCEs) resulting from both
advances in omics technology and the ability of Machine Learning (ML) models to generate novel molecules
3–5
. Consequently,
there is an increasing need to accurately and efficiently predict the safety of new drug candidates in humans. To this end,
there has been an escalation of ML models predicting toxicity, but not without its challenges. Of the many challenges, one
is to correctly model a multi-faceted problem across different in vitro, in vivo and clinical platforms of varying granularities.
Another non-trivial challenge is to comprehensively explain predictions across all these platforms which is non-trivial. To
illustrate on the first challenge, a variety of ML models have been applied to chemical, biological, and mechanistic data that
predict the toxicity of chemicals with varying granularity and relevancy to toxicity in humans, i.e., clinical toxicity (Section 1 in
Supplementary). These models have differed in inputs
6–10
, architectures
8, 11–15
, and prediction platforms (i.e., endpoints or
the specific experimental target including in vivo, in vitro, or clinical). A majority of ML models have focused on predicting
specific in vitro endpoints
16–19 
from only chemical structures , differing mainly in the molecular representations used
8–10, 20
. In
particular, nuclear receptor endpoints were a major focus of the Tox21 Challenge, a data challenge as a subset of the broader
“Toxicology in the 21st Century” initiative. The Tox21 challenge provides the results of 12 in vitro assays that test seven
different nuclear receptor signaling effects and five stress response effects of 10,000 molecules in cells
16–19
.
Toxicities predicted in vitro or in vivo are not necessarily in concordance with each other
21, 22 
nor to humans
2, 23–26
, thus
reducing their ability to predict clinical toxicity
2
. The granularity of toxicity tests varies across the in vitro, in vivo, and clinical
platforms. In vitro testing is the most granular and captures the ability of a chemical to disrupt biological pathways at the
cellular level. In contrast,clinical testing is coarse-grained and captures the interactions of chemicals at multiple levels in the
arXiv:2204.06614v1 [q-bio.QM] 13 Apr 2022

human, including organs and tissues. Thus, ML models trained on in vitro and in vivo data might not reliably capture clinical
toxicity.
Despite toxicity being a multi-task problem, majority of ML models have predicted toxicity in each platform separately with
single-task models (Section 1 in Supplementary). A single molecule can demonstrate simultaneously a multitude of responses
in different assays and different living organisms. Various solutions for modeling multiple toxic endpoints have been reported,
by creating separate binary classification models for each endpoint
7, 27
, or by using multiple classification models the define
classes
28–36
. Yet, thus far, the multiplicity problem has been modeled by predicting multiple endpoints within the same testing
platform: in vitro, in vivo, or in humans, separately.
The second challenge of ML models in predictive toxicology is to explain the predictions made, particularly within deep
learning-based models. ML toxicity models have increasingly shifted towards deep learning
8, 15 
pushed by its superior predictive
performance
8 
and ability to self-select significant features
37
. Deep learning (DL) models are “black-box” models with limited
explainability, i.e., do not provide reasoning for predicting that a molecule is toxic or nontoxic. This explanation is essential for
designing new molecules and for providing greater confidence to the experimentalist end-users. As a result, the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) strongly recommends that predictions of computational toxicology
models be explainable
38
. Efforts in explaining toxicity predictions have focused on pinpointing the presence of certain features,
such as toxicophores, derived from a range of methods, including simpler quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR)
models
39, 40 
and explaining training in Deep Neural Networks (DNNs)
8 
(Section 1.1 in Supplementary). These methods
generally do not examine the effect of the absence of these features. Defining minimal and necessary features, as well as present
and absent features, might provide a comprehensive explanation that is more intuitive to end-users.
Herein, we have developed a deep learning framework with the aim of improving accuracy and explainability of clinical
toxicity predictions by taking advantage of in vitro, in vivo, and clinical toxicity data, and more advanced molecular representa-
tions. We simultaneously predicted in vitro, in vivo, and clinical toxicity through deep multi-task models, while comparing to
their single-task and transfer learning counterparts. Two different molecular representations were tested; Morgan fingerprints
and in-house created pre-trained SMILES embeddings encoding for the relationships among the chemicals. We used this
framework for establishing concordance across in vitro, in vivo, and clinical datasets. Notably, in response to the adoption of
the 3 Rs (Replacement, Reduction, and Refinement of animal testing) in global legislation
41, 42
, we assessed the need for animal
data in making clinical toxicity predictions. To provide more comprehensive molecular explanations of toxicity predictions, we
adopted the Contrastive Explanations Method (CEM) explainability model
43 
which explains "black-box" DNN predictions by
revealing pertinent positive (PP) and pertinent negative (PN) features as chemical structures correlating to a given prediction.
Specifically, we explained single-task toxicity predictions in vitro, in vivo, and clinically. The PPs represent the minimum
required substructures for classification of a molecule (toxicophores for a toxic prediction), and the PNs represent the minimum
changes to a molecule that would flip its predicted class label, from toxic to nontoxic or vice versa. Such an explanation should
expand the scope of predictive toxicology while providing information on both toxicophores and nontoxic substructures.
1 Model Framework
Two different molecular representations were used as inputs; commonly used Morgan Fingerprints (FP) and more complex
SMILES embeddings (SE) (Fig 1(A)). FP vectorize the presence of a substructure within varying radii around an atom. FP are
easy to compute and have high performance among other fingerprints
44
, and are thus widely used. However, FP are simplistic
representations of chemical structures, not coding for relationships between substructures, unlike molecular graphs, nor for
relationships between the chemicals. To improve on this, the SE were created using a neural network-based model that translates
from non-canonical SMILES to canonical SMILES, encoding for the relationship between chemicals within the datasets.
With these molecular representations, toxicities in vivo, in vitro, and clinical, were predicted through multi-task (MTDNN)
(Fig 1(B)) and single-task Deep Neural Networks (STDNN) (Fig 1(B)). The MTDNN predicts each platform (in vivo, in vitro,
clinical) as a different task within one model, with each task consisting of a single or multiple classes (or endpoints). In contrast,
the STDNN predicts each platform with a separate model.
As a proof-of-concept, endpoints from previous benchmarking efforts
45 
and data challenges
16 
were chosen, and are not
exhaustive. For the clinical platform, the endpoint was whether or not a molecule failed clinical phase trials due to toxicity, as
obtained from the ClinTox dataset
45
. For the in vitro platform, 12 different endpoints from the Tox21 Challenge
16 
were used,
whether or not a molecule is active in disrupting seven neural receptor assays and five stress response assays. Finally, for the in
vivo platform, one endpoint for acute oral toxicity in mice was used from the commercially available RTECS (Registry of Toxic
Effects of Chemical Substances) dataset. The acute oral toxicity endpoint was defined by an LD
50 
(lethal dose for 50% of the
population) cutoff of 5,000 mg/kg specified by GHS and EPA (< 5,000 mg/kg as toxic, > 5,000 mg/kg as nontoxic).
We further tested the need of in vivo data to predict clinical toxicity with the multi-task DNN and its transfer learning
counterpart. Different combinations of in vivo, in vitro, and clinical tasks in the MTDNN were investigated to determine the
most relevant tasks for predicting clinical toxicity. One way to achieve this is to leverage transfer learning, which allows a base
2/16

model trained on one task to be re-purposed for another related task. In our use case, we compared the ability of a base model
trained on in vivo or in vitro data to be transferred to predicting clinical toxicity.
Further, we explained DNN predictions by adapting the Contrastive Explanations Method (CEM)
43 
to molecular structure
input. Specifically, the CEM was adapted to explain toxicity predictions made by the STDNN trained on Morgan fingerprints
for in vivo, in vitro, and clinical platforms (Fig 1(C)). For an overview of related work on explanations for molecular toxicity
prediction see Section 1.1 in Supplementary. We had previously performed a proof-of-concept
46 
for this approach by explaining
predictions on one specific in vitro endpoint ("SR-MMP", the ability of molecules to disrupt the mitochondrial membrane
potential (MMP) in cells
16
). In this work, we further expand to other in vitro endpoints, and to in vivo and clinical platforms.
The CEM explains by identifying pertinent positive (PP) and counterfactual pertinent negative (PN) substructures within
the input molecules. The PPs are the minimal and necessary substructures that correlate to a prediction, while the PNs are
substructures that would switch the given prediction.
Figure 1. Framework adopted in this study for explainable, single-task, and multi-task prediction of in vitro, in vivo,
and clinical toxicity. A) Given an input of different molecular representations, fingerprints and latent space SMILES
embeddings, B) a multi-task classification model predicts whether a molecule is toxic or not for in vitro, in vivo, and clinical
endpoints. Furthermore, the Contrastive Explanation method explains C) predictions from single-task models trained on
fingerprints for the same endpoints. The method pinpoints minimal and necessary chemical substructures that are either present
(pertinent positive, PP) or absent (pertinent negative, PN) for a specific prediction.
2 Results
2.1 Deep Single-Task and Multi-Task Predictive Models - Morgan Fingerprints and SMILES Embeddings
We evaluated the performance of our framework by metrics of AUC-ROC (Area under Receiver Operating Characteristic curve)
and balanced accuracy. We compared the performance of STDNN (blue in Figs 2, 3) to MTDNN (multiple colors in Figs 2, 3)
with either SMILES embeddings (SE, darker color in Figs 2, 3) or Morgan fingerprints (FP, lighter colors in Figs 2, 3) as input.
Performance of different platform combinations in the MTDNN was contrasted by combining all three in vivo, in vitro and
clinical platforms (red in Figs 2, 3), clinical and in vitro platforms (purple in Fig 2, 3), clinical and in vivo platforms (orange in
Figs 2, 3), and in vitro and in vivo platforms (yellow in Figs 2, 3).
Area under the ROC curves (AUC-ROC) was determined against the best performing models in MoleculeNet
34 
(grey in
Fig 2), a widely used benchmark for molecular predictions. The best model employed by MoleculeNet on ClinTox (clinical)
3/16

was a graph neural net baseline operating on molecular graphs
47 
(Weave). On Tox21 (in vitro), the best performing model in
Moleculenet was a graph convolutional neural net (GC)
34
. MoleculeNet did not benchmark RTECS (in vivo), but we used their
provided benchmark methods to train and test the models used on ClinTox and Tox21
34
, on RTECS. The resulting best model
from MoleculeNet on RTECS was the influence relevance voting system (IRV), which is an enhanced k-nearest neighbor model
augmented by weights provided from one-layer DNNs
34
.
2.1.1 Area under Receiver Operating Characteristic curve
AUC-ROC performance markedly improved on

[... truncated ...]