=== Paper 2306.04338v1 (alphaxiv full) ===

CHANGING DATA SOURCES IN THE AGE OF
MACHINE LEARNING
FOR OFFICIAL STATISTICS
PRESENTED AT UNECE MACHINE LEARNING FOR OFFICIAL STATISTICS WORKSHOP 2023
Cedric De Boom
Statistics Flanders
Belgium
cedric.deboom@vlaanderen.be
Michael Reusens
Statistics Flanders
Belgium
michael.reusens@vlaanderen.be
June 6, 2023
ABSTRACT
Data science has become increasingly essential for the production of official statistics, as it enables
the automated collection, processing, and analysis of large amounts of data. With such data science
practices in place, it enables more timely, more insightful and more flexible reporting. However, the
quality and integrity of data-science-driven statistics rely on the accuracy and reliability of the data
sources and the machine learning techniques that support them. In particular, changes in data sources
are inevitable to occur and pose significant risks that are crucial to address in the context of machine
learning for official statistics.
This paper gives an overview of the main risks, liabilities, and uncertainties associated with changing
data sources in the context of machine learning for official statistics. We provide a checklist of the
most prevalent origins and causes of changing data sources; not only on a technical level but also
regarding ownership, ethics, regulation, and public perception. Next, we highlight the repercussions
of changing data sources on statistical reporting. These include technical effects such as concept
drift, bias, availability, validity, accuracy and completeness, but also the neutrality and potential
discontinuation of the statistical offering. We offer a few important precautionary measures, such as
enhancing robustness in both data sourcing and statistical techniques, and thorough monitoring. In
doing so, machine learning-based official statistics can maintain integrity, reliability, consistency, and
relevance in policy-making, decision-making, and public discourse.
1 Introduction
The field of statistics has long played a critical role in informing policy decisions, driving innovation, and advancing
scientific knowledge. Traditional statistical methods such as surveys and censuses have provided valuable insights into
a wide range of topics, from population demographics to economic trends and public opinion. However, in recent years,
the increasing availability of open and large data sources has opened up new opportunities for statistical analysis. In
particular, the rise of machine learning has transformed the field of statistics, enabling the analysis of massive datasets,
the identification of complex patterns and relationships, non-linear forecasting, etc. [ 1, 2]. Machine learning algorithms
can be used to analyze data from a wide range of sources, providing insights that traditional survey methods may not
capture.
The use of machine learning for official statistics has the potential to provide more timely, accurate and comprehensive
insights into a wide range of societal topics [ 3]. By leveraging the vast amounts of data that are generated by individuals
and entities on a daily basis, statistical agencies can gain a more nuanced understanding of trends and patterns, and
respond more quickly to emerging issues.
However, this shift towards machine learning also presents a number of challenges. In particular, there are concerns
about data quality, privacy, and security, as well as the need for appropriate technical skills and infrastructure [4, 5], as
arXiv:2306.04338v1 [stat.ML] 7 Jun 2023

well as challenges related to explainability, accuracy, reproducibility, timeliness, and cost effectiveness [6 ]. As statistical
agencies grapple with these challenges, it is essential to ensure that the benefits of machine learning are balanced
against the risks and that the resulting insights are both accurate and representative. In this paper, we explore the
changing data sources in the age of machine learning for official statistics, as we believe that this pervasive issue largely
remains underexposed, as we will explain in Section 2.2. In that respect, we highlight some of the key considerations
for statistical agencies looking to incorporate machine learning into their workflows in Section 3, by zooming in on the
causes and risks associated with using external data sources, the consequences on using such sources for statistical
production, and, finally, a set of mitigations that should ideally be incorporated in any genuine deployment of machine
learning for official statistics.
2 Machine learning for official statistics
The data abundance in governmental, corporate, social and personal contexts, both online and offline, becomes a
tantalizing source and opportunity for the improvement and expansion of official statistics. For example, to inquire
about the overall satisfaction with life of its citizens, a nation could organize periodic surveys. But when this nation has
access to its citizens’ social media posts, likes, reader’s letters, media consumption, ticket sales, (online) shopping carts,
etc. it could use all of these data as a proxy to extract novel and innovative statistical insights [ 7 ]. Typically, the end
result is either a new statistic, a statistic that complements an existing one, or an ersatz statistic that aims to replace
one or more existing statistics. We will briefly zoom in on the different components of which such a novel statistic is
generally comprised.
2.1 Machine learning
To derive novel insights and innovative statistics from data, data scientists and statistical researchers often use a wide
variety of powerful tools that are in the realm of machine learning
1
. In this paper we will not go into too much detail
about machine learning. However, the use of data sources together with machine learning models can cause unwanted
effects regarding statistical production, see further in Section 3. So, we deem it useful to provide a high-level overview
of the typical process that involves machine learning for official statistics.
Machine learning is a subdiscipline of artificial intelligence that enables machines to learn from data and improve
their performance over time without being explicitly programmed. This approach involves building algorithms that
automatically learn from data to identify patterns, relationships, and structures that may be difficult or impossible for
humans to discern. The typical process of designing a machine learning algorithm consists of two main phases: training
and inference. During the training phase, the parameters of a machine learning model are tuned to solve a specific task.
For this, a wide variety of data sources can be used, or even outputs from existing or pre-trained machine learning
models. After the model is trained, its parameters are kept fixed so that the model can be used to predict outcomes or
identify patterns in new or previously unseen data. This process is called inference. It is important to keep in mind the
distinction between training and inference. After training, the model remains unchanged, and it remains unchanged
until it is retrained again. Later, in Section 3, we will focus on the disparities that this can cause w.r.t. the inference
phase and, in consequence, official statistics production.
Supervised learning is one of the most common types of machine learning used for official statistics. This method
involves training a model on a labeled dataset, where each data point has a known outcome or target variable. The
model learns to associate features in the data with the target variable, enabling it to make predictions on new data with
similar features. In the context of official statistics, supervised learning can for example be used to predict the happiness
of an individual based on their Twitter profile [8 ]. Unsupervised learning, on the other hand, is used when the target
variable is unknown or the goal is to identify patterns or relationships within the data. In this approach, the machine
learning model learns to recognize similarities and differences among input data without explicit guidance from labeled
data. In the context of official statistics, unsupervised learning can for example be used to identify citizens, companies
or events that are similar to each other on one or more aspects that could be hidden from plain sight [9].
Machine learning can be used to complement or even replace official statistics, and its ability to nowcast and forecast is
an extremely valuable addition. Modern machine learning models, tools and hardware can analyze vast amounts of data
in real-time or near-real-time, providing more up-to-date and precise estimates of e.g. economic and social trends. By
1
Although originally (and technically) they imply different methods and techniques, the terms machine learning, data science,
artificial intelligence, deep learning... are nowadays considered interchangeable. In this paper we consistently use the term machine
learning to denote the scientific discipline concerned with learning the most optimal model parameters based on data. It is a
subdiscipline of artificial intelligence, while deep learning is a subdiscipline of machine learning. Data science encompasses both
machine learning as well as data preparation, analytics and visualization.
2

incorporating machine learning into official statistical production, one can benefit from the strengths of both approaches
and make more informed decisions based on the most current and accurate data [10].
2.2 External data sources
Let’s focus on the data sources that will power such machine learning models. Their nature, size, structure,
frequency... can be vastly different, they must typically be gathered ‘in the wild’ and should often be combined with
each other to extract meaningful insights. Compared to more traditional data sources for official statistics, they may
present unique and appealing characteristics such as:
Broad-spectrum – Covers a wide variety of topics.
Diversity – A large variety of sources to cover different perspectives.
Availability – Lots of data is freely and easily accessible.
Size – Some datasets can be enormous, sometimes even complete.
Structure – Not only tabular data, but also images, video, text, audio, etc.
Timeliness – (Near) up-to-date and real-time information.
Frequency – Raw data on various, even very fine-grained time scales.
Granularity – Raw data on various, even fine-grained levels of detail.
Coverage – Various locations and regions can be filtered and covered.
On the other hand, before all this data is ready to be exerted for machine learning and official statistical production, a
few challenges need to be overcome, such as:
Data quality – Data may contain errors, biases, or missing values that need to be addressed to ensure accuracy and
reliability.
Data interpretation – Understanding the context and meaning of data can be difficult, especially when dealing with
unstructured data such as text or images.
Data integration – Combining data from different sources with varying structures and formats can be challenging and
time-consuming.
Selection bias – Proper randomization or compiling representative population samples can be challenging, and it
greatly depends on the underlying data origins.
Operationalization bias – Reproducibility can be difficult as it depends on many implicit, hidden, and/or production-
specific design choices [11, 12].
Computational resources – Processing and analyzing large amounts of data may require significant computational
resources.
Privacy and security – Sensitive data may need to be protected and anonymized to ensure privacy and security.
Data ethics – Data collection and use should adhere to ethical principles.
Fairness and justness – The end solution should ideally be as neutral as possible and should not discriminate [13].
Cost – All of the above requires resources, budgets and a talented workforce. In addition, the data source itself might
need to be purchased. In 2016, McKinsey reported that many companies have started to specialize in acquiring and
selling data [14].
3

With the right tools, workforce, technological advances, mindset, and legislative support, these challenges can and
should be manageable. The most challenging piece of the puzzle, however – and one that is more than often ignored –
is the lack of control you can exert over the data sources that are externally gathered. As a national statistics agency,
traditionally, survey data and administrative records that power official statistics are completely under your own control.
But once you start exploiting external data sources to power novel, innovative, complimentary or ersatz statistics, this
lack of control of your data should never be ignored, and if possible, should be front and center on your agenda early on
in the process.
As the popular saying goes: “With great power comes great responsibility” (from Spider-Man, 2002). Having control
and power over your data is essential to fulfilling your responsibilities as a statistics agency. However, in the world of
data, the opposite is often true: with great amounts of external data comes great powerlessness. Therefore, it is crucial
to prioritize the issue of data control when incorporating external sources into official statistics. Taking the time to
establish proper protocols and procedures for external data management can prevent a multitude of issues down the line
and ensure that the data you rely on remain accurate and trustworthy.
This paper delves into the pervasive problem of powerlessness and lack of control, unraveling the multifaceted aspects,
risks, and pitfalls that arise from utilizing external data sources for machine learning in official statistics. We will
explore the concepts of ‘change’ and ‘consequence’ in their most expansive interpretations to comprehensively tackle
this question.
3 The challenge of changing data sources
Relying heavily on external data sources for machine learning in official statistics comes with significant risks. Such a
dependence can leave statistical agencies vulnerable since they have limited control over these sources. This situation
is similar to how our global economy, mobility, and prosperity were once highly dependent on the availability of oil.
Since the prices and availability of these precious resources are often beyond our control, countries can do nothing but
endure price fluctuations and shortages. Clive Humby proclaimed in 2006 that “data is the new oil”, given its powerful
intrinsic value. However, his statement keeps holding true in terms of vulnerability, powerlessness, and lack of control
over external providers.
In the following paragraphs, we will delve into the various types and causes of data changes. We will then discuss the
ramifications of changing data sources for machine learning in official statistics. Finally, we will provide a list of best
practices and tips, although it is important to remember that there is no free lunch: whenever we incorporate external


[... truncated ...]
