=== Paper 1706.06689v1 (alphaxiv full) ===

1
Chemception:
A Deep Neural Network with Minimal Chemistry Knowledge
Matches the Performance of Expert-developed QSAR/QSPR Models
Garrett B. Goh,
*,†
Charles Siegel, Abhinav Vishnu,
†
Nathan O. Hodas,
‡
Nathan Baker
†
†
High Performance Computing Group, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, 902 Battelle Blvd,
Richland, WA 99354
‡
Data Science and Analytics, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, 902 Battelle Blvd, Richland, WA
99354
* Corresponding Author: Garrett B. Goh
Email: garrett.goh@pnnl.gov
Keyword: Deep learning, deep neural networks, cheminformatics, artificial intelligence,
computer vision, convolutional neural network, computational chemistry, QSAR, QSPR

2
Abstract
In the last few years, we have seen the transformative impact of deep learning in many
applications, particularly in speech recognition and computer vision. Inspired by Google’s
Inception-ResNet deep convolutional neural network (CNN) for image classification, we have
developed “Chemception”, a deep CNN for the prediction of chemical properties, using just the
images of 2D drawings of molecules. We develop Chemception without providing any additional
explicit chemistry knowledge, such as basic concepts like periodicity, or advanced features like
molecular descriptors and fingerprints. We then show how Chemception can serve as a general-
purpose neural network architecture for predicting toxicity, activity, and solvation properties when
trained on a modest database of 600 to 40,000 compounds. When compared to multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) deep neural networks trained with ECFP fingerprints, Chemception slightly
outperforms in activity and solvation prediction and slightly underperforms in toxicity prediction.
Having matched the performance of expert-developed QSAR/QSPR deep learning models, our
work demonstrates the plausibility of using deep neural networks to assist in computational
chemistry research, where the feature engineering process is performed primarily by a deep
learning algorithm.

3
1. Introduction
ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) is an annual assessment
and competition of various image classification computer algorithms for computer vision
applications. In 2012, deep learning algorithms were first introduced to this community by Hinton
and co-workers,
1
and their deep neural network (DNN) model, AlexNet, achieved a 16.4% top-5
error rate, far exceeding the 25-30% error rate for state-of-the-art models employed at that time.
1
Since then, DNN-based models have become the dominant algorithm used in computer vision, and
human accuracy (less than 5% for top-5 error) was achieved by 2015, approximately 3 years after
the entry of deep learning into this community.
2-3
More recently, deep learning has also begun to
emerge in other fields, such as high-energy particle physics,
4-5
astrophysics,
6
and bioinformatics,
7-
8
In chemistry, a few notable recent achievements include DNN-based models winning the Merck
Kaggle challenge for activity prediction in 2012 and the NIH Tox21 challenge for toxicity
prediction in 2014. Since then, numerous research groups have demonstrated the impact of DNN-
based models to predict a wide range of properties, including activity,
9-12
toxicity,
13-14
reactivity,
15-
17
solubility,
18
, ADMET,
19
docking,
20
atomization energies and other quantum properties.
21-23
In
recent reviews across various chemistry sub-fields, DNN-based models typically perform as well
as or better than previous state-of-the-art models based on traditional machine learning algorithms
such as support vector machines, and random forests.
24-25
Unlike other machine learning algorithms, including those used by past and current
computational chemistry applications, deep learning distinguishes itself in the use of a hierarchical
cascade of non-linear functions. This allows it to learn representations and extract necessary
features (which are conceptually similar to molecular descriptors and fingerprints in the context of
chemistry) from its input data to predict the desired property of interest. This representation

4
learning ability is the key capability that has enabled deep learning to make significant and
transformative impacts in its “parent” field of computer vision. Prior to the introduction of deep
learning, computer vision researchers invested substantial efforts in developing appropriate
features
26
; such expert-driven development has been mostly replaced by deep learning models that
automatically develop their own set of internal features, and have exceeded human-level accuracy
in certain tasks.
2-3
In their current state, deep learning algorithms are not artificial general
intelligence or strong “AI” systems and, as such, cannot be replace human creativity or intelligence
in the scientific research process. Nevertheless, it is undeniable that deep learning have
successfully demonstrated performance that is as good as, and at times superior to humans, in task-
specific applications that goes beyond computer vision. For example, AlphaGo, a program based
off deep neural networks outperformed top human players in Go in 2016,
27
which is a game that
is over 10
50
times more complex than chess, algorithms such as Google Neural Machine
Translation are almost effectively as good as human translators for some languages,
28
and deep
neural networks have been critical to the development of various “intelligent” software and
products, including self-driving cars and personal assistant software (Siri, Cortana, etc.). In all
these high impact examples that utilize deep learning algorithms, there is a common theme – what
used to be in the domain of human experts, notably feature engineering, has been to a large extent
replaced by the representation learning ability of deep neural networks. Such a research paradigm
now drives much of modern deep learning research, as illustrated by recent works of Google’s
Machine Intelligence research,
29
and Microsoft AI research.
30

5
Figure 1: The key difference in using deep learning algorithms as a machine learning tool as
opposed to a “machine intelligence” tool is the assistance, augmentation and possible replacement,
for human-led tasks like feature engineering in computational chemistry.

6
In chemistry research, historically, human intelligence building on substantial domain-
expert chemistry knowledge is used in the development of chemistry-specific features such as
molecular descriptors and fingerprints. These human-expert features are then used by machine
learning algorithms for QSAR and QSPR modeling, which in recent years have also included deep
neural networks.
9-23
However, we observed that even in the most recent chemistry literature, deep
learning in chemistry still falls under this traditional research paradigm. As illustrated in Figure
1, there is a subtle but important distinction that separates the approach of deep learning as a
machine learning tool (as it has been traditionally done in chemistry) from the “machine
intelligence” approach utilized in the above-mentioned technological advancements. We propose
that a research paradigm that uses deep learning as a “machine intelligence” tool, should endeavor
to assist and if possible replace, the time and resource intensive part of human-led feature
engineering. In the context of our work, we utilize “raw data” in the form of 2D drawings of
molecules that requires the minimal amount (i.e. no higher than high-school level) of chemical
knowledge to create. We investigate the viability of augmenting and possibly eliminating human-
expert feature engineering in specific computational chemistry applications. We demonstrate this
by training deep convolutional neural networks to predict chemical properties that spans a broad
range of categories including physical (solvation free energies), biochemical (in vitro HIV activity)
and physiological (in vivo toxicity) measurements, without the input of advanced chemistry
knowledge, but instead allowing the network to develop its own representations and features from
the images it is trained on. This deep convolutional neural network, which we term
“Chemception”, despite being provided the minimal chemical knowledge, achieves a level of
performance that is on par with expert-developed QSAR/QSPR models based off molecular
descriptors, fingerprints and other engineered features.

7
The long-term significance of our work therefore lies in the amount of resources that has
been expended and the speed at which Chemception achieves comparable performance for
toxicity, activity and solvation predictions to current QSAR/QSPR models. In terms of computing
resource, the model for the largest dataset on HIV activity can be trained within 24 hours on a
single NVIDIA GTX 1080 GPU. More importantly, as Chemception was used as a “machine
intelligence” tool, virtually zero effort was invested in developing an appropriate set of features.
In contrast, in the traditional machine learning as a tool approach that dominates conventional
QSAR/QSPR modeling, molecular descriptors and fingerprints are required inputs. Therefore,
modern cheminformatics research is dependent on the substantial accumulation of chemistry
research and knowledge dating back to the 1940s where the first molecular descriptors like the
Wiener index and Platt number were reported in the literature.
31-32
Therefore, the development of
an appropriate set of molecular descriptors and other advance features is both a non-trivial research
task, and a pre-requisite for QSAR/QSPR modeling to succeed. However, as Chemception
performs comparably to existing QSAR/QSPR models, its use technically obviates the necessary
requirement to develop appropriate molecular descriptors and fingerprints for cheminformatics
research, which will be useful in situations where the current generation of expert-developed
features fail to provide sufficient performance. In addition, the fact that the same Chemception
architecture performs similarly well for different chemical properties, without the need for tuning
the network design for each property, suggests that Chemception is a general-purpose neural
network that can be used to predict other properties of small-molecules beyond those studied in
this paper. Lastly, as we have taken a domain agnostic approach in developing Chemception, we
anticipate that the general approach used will also be transferable to other types of research
challenges, particularly if an appropriate pictorial representation of the data exist.

8
2. Methods
2.1 Computational Framework Overview
As illustrated in Figure 2, the end-to-end workflow of the Chemception framework
requires minimal chemical knowledge beyond the generation of 2D chemical structures. SMILES
strings were converted to their respective 2D molecular structures, which were then mapped onto
an input array used to train the convolutional neural network in a supervised fashion. Apart from
the generation of chemical images and the measured chemical properties used to train the model;
no additional source of chemistry-inspired features, such as molecular descriptors or fingerprints
were used.
Figure 2: Illustration of the Chemception framework. After a SMILES to structure conversion,
the 2D images are mapped onto an 80 x 80 image that serves as the input image data for training
a deep neural network to predict toxicity, activity, and solvation properties.
2.2 Data Preparation
Data preparation was performed using Python, utilizing script bindings to open-source
cheminformatics software, including OpenBabel
33
, Pybel
34
and RDKit
35
through the Cinfony
interface.
36
Chemicals in the databases are stored as SMILES strings,
37-38
which are compact string
representation that describes a molecule’s structure. The SMILES string were decoded to their
corresponding 2D molecular structure using the above-mentioned cheminformatics software. The
resulting coordinates of the 2D structure of each molecule were then mapped onto a 80 x 80 grid,
where each pixel had a resolution of 0.5 Å as illustrated in Figure 2. The resulting 80 x 80 array

9
was then greyscale “color coded” based on the presence of an atom or a bond. Specifically, atoms
mapped onto the grid were assigned a number based on its atomic mass unit, and bonds mapped
onto the grid were assigned the number 2, as it does not correspond to the identity of any element
in the training set. The other parts of the grid were empty (i.e. vacuum) and were defaulted to the
number 0. The resulting discretized image of the molecule was then parsed into a deep
convolutional neural network for training.
2.3 Chemistry Knowledge Used
While open-source cheminformatics software was used in the data preparation stage, its
role was to automate the data preparation process and facilitate compatibility with existing
chemical databases. In other words, using a database of photographs of consistently and correctly
drawn chemical structures that requires no more than high school level chemistry knowledge as
input data, would be equivalent to using the computer-generated structures generated by the data
preparation workflow as mentioned above. In addition, it should be emphasized that no additional
source of chemistry-inspired features or inputs, such as molecular descriptors or fingerprints were
used in training the model. This means that Chemception was not explicitly provided with even
the most basic chemical concepts like “valency” or “periodicity”. Given our choice to encode the
image in a single-channel greyscale where each atom and bond has a unique number, there is the
potential for the neural network to learn basic chemistry concepts if that would facilitate the
prediction of the property of interest. However, such a task may not be particularly straightforward
because atom information, bond information, and information about empty space (vacuum) all
share the same channel in the image. Therefore, the prediction of the molecule’s properties is
entirely dependent on Chemception’s ability to learn relevant representations from the image data

10
and automatically engineer its own features (i.e. its own analogous set of “molecular descriptors”)
relevant for predicting the chemical property of interest.
2.4 Dataset Description
Table 1: Summary of datasets used to evaluate the performance of Chemception
Dataset Property Task Size
Tox21 Physiological: Toxicity Multi-task binary classification 8014
HIV Biochemical: Activity Single-task binary classification 41,193
FreeSolv Physical: Free energy of solvation Single-task regression 643
We obtained several publically available datasets (Table 1), mostly from the MoleculeNet
benchmark database,
39
to evaluate the performance of Chemception. The Tox21 dataset
40
is a NIH-
funded public database of toxicity measurements comprising of 8014 compounds on 12 different
measurements ranging from stress response pathways to nuclear receptors. This dataset provides
a binar

[... truncated ...]
