=== Paper 2204.07532v3 (alphaxiv full) ===

Accurate ADMET Prediction with XGBoost
Hao Tian,
†
Rajas Ketkar,
‡
and Peng Tao
∗,†
†Department of Chemistry, Center for Research Computing, Center for Drug Discovery,
Design, and Delivery (CD4), Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas, United States
of America
‡Wakeland High School, Frisco, Texas, United States of America
E-mail: ptao@smu.edu
1
arXiv:2204.07532v3 [q-bio.BM] 18 Sep 2022

Abstract
The absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity (ADMET) prop-
erties are important in drug discovery as they define efficacy and safety. In this work, we
applied an ensemble of features, including fingerprints and descriptors, and a tree-based
machine learning model, extreme gradient boosting, for accurate ADMET prediction.
Our model performs well in the Therapeutics Data Commons ADMET benchmark
group. For 22 tasks, our model is ranked first in 18 tasks and top 3 in 21 tasks. The
trained machine learning models are integrated in ADMETboost, a web server that is
publicly available at https://ai-druglab.smu.edu/admet.
Introduction
Properties such as absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity (AD-
MET) are important in small molecule drug discovery and therapeutics. It is reported that
many clinical trials fail due to the deficiencies in ADMET properties.
1,2
While profiling AD-
MET in the early stage of drug discovery is desirable, experimental evaluation of ADMET
properties is costly with limited available data.
Recent developments in machine learning (ML) promote research in chemistry and bi-
ology
3–5
and bring new opportunities for ADMET prediction. ADMETLab
6
provides 31
ADMET endpoints with six machine learning models, and further advanced to 53 endpoints
using a multi-task graph attention network.
7
vNN
8
is a web server that applies variable
nearest neighborhood to predict 15 ADMET properties. admetSAR
9
and admetSAR 2.0
10
are also ML based web servers for drug discovery or environmental risk assessment with ran-
dom forest, support vector machine and k-nearest neighbors models. As a fingerprint-based
random forest model, FP-ADMET
11
evaluated over 50 ADMET and ADMET-related tasks.
In these ML models, small molecules are provided in SMILES representations and further
featurized using fingerprints, such as extended connectivity fingerprints
12
and Molecular AC-
Cess System (MACCS) fingerprints.
13
Beside these, there are many other fingerprints and
2

descriptors that can be used to for ADMET prediction, such as PubChem fingerprints and
Mordred descriptors. Taking advantage of all possible features enables sufficient learning
process for machine learning models.
One common issue is that many machine learning models in previous work are trained
on different datasets, which leads to unfair comparison and evaluation of ML models. As a
curated dataset, Therapeutics Data Commons (TDC)
14
unifies resources in therapeutics for
systematic access and evaluation. There are 22 tasks in TDC ADMET benchmark group,
each with small molecules SMILES representations and corresponding ADMET property
values or labels.
Extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost),
15
developed by Chen et al., is a powerful machine
learning model and has been shown to be effective in regression and classification tasks in
biology and chemistry.
16–19
In this work, we applied XGBoost to learn a feature ensemble,
including multiple fingerprints and descriptors, for accurate ADMET prediction. Our model
performs well in the TDC ADMET benchmark group with 11 tasks ranked first and 19 tasks
ranked top 3.
Methods
Therapeutics Data Commons
Therapeutics Data Commons is a Python library with an open-science initiative. It holds
many therapeutics tasks and datasets including target discovery, activity modeling, efficacy
and safety, and manufacturing. TDC provides a unified and meaningful benchmark for fair
comparison between different machine learning models. For each ADMET prediction task,
TDC splits the dataset into the predefined 80% training set and 20% test set with scaf-
fold split, which simulates the real-world application scenario where a well-trained machine
learning model would be asked to predict ADMET properties on unseen and structurally
different drugs.
3

Fingerprints and Descriptors
Six featurizers from DeepChem
20
were used to compute fingerprints and descriptors:
• MACCS fingerprints are common structural keys that compute a binary string based
on a molecule’s structural features.
• Extended connectivity fingerprints compute a bit vector by breaking up a molecule
into circular neighborhoods. They are widely used for structure-activity modeling.
• Mol2Vec fingerprints
21
create vector representations of molecules based on an unsu-
pervised machine learning approach.
• PubChem fingerprints consist of 881 structural keys that cover a wide range of sub-
structures and features. It is used by PubChem for similarity searching.
• Mordred descriptors
22
calculate a set of chemical descriptors such as the count of
aromatic atoms or of all halogen atoms.
• RDKit descriptors calculate a set of chemical descriptors such as molecular weight and
the number of radical electrons.
Extreme Gradient Boosting
Extreme gradient boosting is a powerful machine learning model. It boosts model per-
formance through ensemble that includes decision tree models trained in sequence.
Let D = {(x
i
, y
i
)(|D| = n, x
i
∈ R
m
, y
i
∈ R
n
)} represents a training set with m features
and n labels. The j-th decision tree in XGBoost model makes a prediction for sample (x
i
, y
i
)
by g
j
(x
i
) = w
q
(x
i
) where w
q
is the leaf weights. The final prediction of XGBoost model is
the sum of all M decision tree predictions with ˆy
i
=
∑
M
j=1
g
j
(x
i
).
The objective function consists of a loss function l and a regularization term Ω to reduce
overfitting:
4

obj(θ) =
N
∑
i=1
l(y
i
, ˆy
i
) +
M
∑
j=1
Ω(f
i
) (1)
where Ω(f ) = γT +
λ
2
∑
T
l=1
ω
2
l
. T represents the number of leaves while γ, λ are parameters
for regularization.
During training, XGBoost iteratively trains a new decision tree based on the output of
the previous tree. The prediction of the t-th iteration ˆy
i
(t)
= ˆy
i
(t−1)
+ g
t
(x
i
). The objective
function of the t-th iteration is:
obj
(t)
=
N
∑
i=1
l(y
i
, ˆy
i
(t−1)
+ g
t
(x
i
)) + Ω(f
i
) (2)
XGBoost introduces first and second derivatives of this objective function, which can be
expressed as follows by applying Taylor expansion at second order:
obj
(t)
'
N
∑
i=1
[l(y
i
, ˆy
i
(t−1)
) + ∂
ˆy
(t−1)
l(y
i
, ˆy
(t−1)
)f
t
(x
i
)
+
1
2
∂
2
ˆy
(t−1)
l(y
i
, ˆy
(t−1)
)f
2
t
(x
i
)] + Ω(f
i
)
(3)
A total of seven parameters are being fine-tuned with selected value options and are listed
in Table 1. Default values are used for other parameters.
Performance Criteria
For regression tasks, mean absolute error (MAE) and Spearman’s correlation coefficient
are considered to evaluate model performance:
• MAE is used to measure the deviation between predictions y
i
and real values x
i
in n
sample size.
MAE =
∑
n
i=1
|y
i
− x
i
|
n
(4)
5

Table 1: Fine-tuned XGBoost Parameters
Name and Description Values
n estimators:
Number of gradient boosted trees.
[50, 100, 200, 500, 1000]
max depth:
Maximum tree depth.
[3, 4, 5, 6, 7]
learning rate:
Boosting learning rate.
[0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3]
subsample:
Subsample ratio of instances.
[0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0]
colsample bytree:
Subsample ratio of columns.
[0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0]
reg alpha:
L1 regularization weights.
[0, 0.1, 1, 5, 10]
reg lambda:
L2 regularization weights.
[0, 0.1, 1, 5, 10]
• Spearman’s correlation coefficient ρ measures the correlation strength between two
ranked variables. Where d
i
represents the difference in paired ranks,
ρ = 1 −
6
∑
d
2
i
n(n
2
− 1)
(5)
For binary classification tasks, area under curve (AUC) is calculated with receiver op-
erating characteristic (ROC) and precision-recall curve (PRC). For both metrics, a higher
value indicates a more powerful model.
• AUROC is the area under the curve where x-axis is false positive rate and y-axis is
true positive rate.
• AUPRC is the area under the curve where x-axis is recall and y-axis is precision.
All metrics are calculated with evaluation functions provided by the TDC APIs.
6

Table 2: Model Evaluation on the TDC ADMET Leaderboard
a
TDC Current Top 1 XGBoost
Task Metric Method Score Score Rank
Absorption
Caco2 MAE RDKit2D + MLP 0.393 ± 0.024 0.288 ± 0.011 1st
HIA AUROC AttrMasking 0.978 ± 0.006 0.987 ± 0.002 1st
Pgp AUROC
AttrMasking 0.929 ± 0.006 0.911 ± 0.002 4th
Bioav AUROC RDKit2D + MLP 0.672 ± 0.021 0.700 ± 0.010 1st
Lipo MAE ContextPred 0.535 ± 0.012 0.533 ± 0.005 1st
AqSol MAE
AttentiveFP 0.776 ± 0.008 0.727 ± 0.004 1st
Distribution
BBB AUROC ContextPred 0.897 ± 0.004 0.905 ± 0.001 1st
PPBR MAE
NeuralFP 9.292 ± 0.384 8.251 ± 0.115 1st
VDss Spearman
RDKit2D + MLP 0.561 ± 0.025 0.612 ± 0.018 1st
Metabolism
CYP2C9 Inhibition AUPRC AttentiveFP 0.749 ± 0.004 0.794 ± 0.004 1st
CYP2D6 Inhibition AUPRC AttentiveFP 0.646 ± 0.014 0.721 ± 0.003 1st
CYP3A4 Inhibition AUPRC AttentiveFP 0.851 ± 0.006 0.877 ± 0.002 1st
CYP2C9 Substrate AUPRC Morgan + MLP 0.380 ± 0.015 0.387 ± 0.018 1st
CYP2D6 Substrate AUPRC
RDKit2D + MLP 0.677 ± 0.047 0.648 ± 0.023 3rd
CYP3A4 Substrate AUPRC CNN 0.662 ± 0.031 0.680 ± 0.005 1st
Excretion
Half Life Spearman Morgan + MLP 0.329 ± 0.083 0.396 ± 0.027 1st
CL-Hepa Spearman ContextPred 0.439 ± 0.026 0.420 ± 0.011 2nd
CL-Micro Spearman RDKit2D + MLP 0.586 ± 0.014 0.587 ± 0.006 1st
Toxicity
LD50 MAE Morgan + MLP 0.649 ± 0.019 0.602 ± 0.006 1st
hERG AUROC
RDKit2D + MLP 0.841 ± 0.020 0.806 ± 0.005 3rd
Ames AUROC
AttrMasking 0.842 ± 0.008 0.859 ± 0.002 1st
DILI AUROC
AttrMasking 0.919 ± 0.008 0.933 ± 0.011 1st
a
Only models that have been evaluated by most of the tasks are considered.
Results and Discussion
Model Performance
We first used a random seed to split the overall dataset into a training set (80%) and a
test set (20%). XGBoost model was trained with the training set using 5-fold cross validation
(CV). A randomized grid search CV was applied to search hyper parameters. The parameter
set with the highest CV score is used, and the model performance is evaluated on the
7

test set. We repeat this process five times with varying random seeds from zero to four
following the TDC guideline. The evaluation results are listed on Table 2. In each task,
there are at least seven other models or featurization methods being compared against,
including DeepPurpose
23
, AttentiveFP
24
, ContextPred
25
, NeuralFP
26
, AttrMasking
25
and
graph convolutional network
27
. For all 22 tasks, XGBoost is ranked first for 18 and top 3
for 21 out of 22 tasks, demonstrating the success of XGBoost model in predicting ADMET
tasks.
The superior prediction results of XGBoost are explainable. As shown in Table 2, pre-
viously, there are 13 tasks which the top models are trained using descriptors (RDKit 2D
+ MLP model) or fingerprints (Morgan + MLP model and AttentiveFP). Inspired by this,
XGBoost was trained using a combination of fingerprints and descriptors. These featuriza-
tion methods cover both structural features (MACCS, extended connectivity, Mol2Vec, and
PubChem fingerprints) to chemical descriptors (Mordred and RDKit descriptors) for each
given SMILES representation. For a specific property prediction task, XGBoost can take the
consideration of all possible molecular features, select the best set of them for prediction,
while avoiding over-fitting by controlling tree complexity. Together, these would boost the
prediction performance of XGBoost to be superior to other models.
To further understand the importance of each fingerprint and descriptor, for each AD-
MET task, averaged feature importance is calculated for each feature set and is plotted in
Figure 1. It is shown that Mordred descriptors are consistently the most important feature
in all tasks, followed by Mol2Vec and Circular fingerprints. MACCS Keys fingerprint set is
the least important among the five groups of features. As Mordred descriptors are consid-
ered significantly more important than other features, we retrained the models in each task
using only this feature set. The results are listed in Table 3. XGBoost with only Mordred
outperformed the base model in three tasks (HIA, Aqsol and PPBR), dropped greatly in
Metabolism and Excretion related tasks and was comparable in other tasks.
Searching for the parameter set with best validation performance is necessary. However,
8

Figure 1: Average feature importance of fingerprints and descriptors in (A) absorption,
(B) distribution, (C) metabolism, (D) elimination, and (E) toxicity tasks.
there are over 100,000 parameter combinations in the current search space, and it could
growth exponentially with additional features being considered. It is challenging to iterate
over all possible parameter set to find the best parameter set. In the current study, a
randomized grid search CV was used. It should be noted that the randomized grid search
CV does not necessarily lead to the global optimum parameter set due to the randomness
nature. In recent decades, Bayesian optimization has been developed to search in the hyper
parameter space, such as hyperopt,
28
which might be promising under such tasks.
Web Server
The trained machine learning models are hosted on the SMU high computing center at
https://ai-druglab.smu.edu/admet. A SMILES representation is required for ADMET
predictions. On the result page, molecule structures in both 2D and 3D are displayed using
Open Babel.
29
A table is present to summary prediction results under 22 tasks. Each task
is colored with green, yellow or red to indicate the optimal level if there is any. The web
server has been tested rigorously to respond within seconds.
9

Table 3: Performance comparison of XGBoost models trained with all features and with
only Mordred.
TDC XGBoost with all features XGBoost with Mordred
Task Metric Score Score
Absorption
Caco2 MAE 0.288 ± 0.011 0.301 ± 0.008
HIA AUROC 0.987 ± 0.002 0.990 ± 0.002
Pgp AUROC
0.911 ± 0.002 0.909 ± 0.005
Bioav AUROC 0.700 ± 0.010 0.692 ± 0.016
Lipo MAE
0.533 ± 0.005 0.538 ± 0.003
AqSol MAE 0.727 ± 0.004 0.720 ± 0.003
Distribution
BBB AUROC 0.905 ± 0.001 0.900 ± 0.001
PPBR MAE
8.251 ± 0.115 7.897 ± 0.061
VDss Spearman 0.612 ± 0.018 0.610 ± 0.005
Metabolism
CYP2C9 Inhibition AUPRC 0.794 ± 0.004 0.781 ± 0.002
CYP2D6 Inhibition AUPRC 0.721 ± 0.003 0.694 ± 0.005
CYP3A4 Inhibition AUPRC 0.877 ± 0.002 0.862 ± 0.002
CYP2C9 Substrate AUPRC 0.387 ± 0.018 0.334 ± 0.004
CYP2D6 Substrate AUPRC 0.648 ± 0.023 0.594 ± 0.034
CYP3A4 Substrate AUPRC
0.680 ± 0.005 0.649 ± 0.013
Excretion
Half Life Spearman 0.396 ± 0.027 0.373 ± 0.008
CL-Hepa Spearman
0.420 ± 0.011 0.378 ± 0.020
CL-Micro Spearman
0.587 ± 0.006 0.576 ± 0.010
Toxicity
LD50 MAE 0.602 ± 0.006 0.602 ± 0.006
hERG AUROC 0.806 ± 0.005 0.763 ± 0.007
Ames AUROC
0.859 ± 0.002 0.856 ± 0.002
DILI AUROC
0.933 ± 0.01

[... truncated ...]
