# HelixADMET: a robust and endpoint extensible ADMET system incorporating self-supervised knowledge transfer

**Paper ID:** 2205.08055v1
**PDF:** https://arxiv.org/pdf/2205.08055v1.pdf
**Full Content:** [2205.08055v1_full.md](2205.08055v1_full.md)

## Summary

Accurate ADMET (an abbreviation for "absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity") predictions can efficiently screen out undesirable drug candidates in the early stage of drug discovery. In recent years, multiple comprehensive ADMET systems that adopt advanced machine learning models have been developed, providing services to estimate multiple endpoints. However, those ADMET systems usually suffer from weak extrapolation ability. First, due to the lack of labelled data for each endpoint, typical machine learning models perform frail for the molecules with unobserved scaffolds. Second, most systems only provide fixed built-in endpoints and cannot be customised to satisfy various research requirements. To this end, we develop a robust and endpoint extensible ADMET system, HelixADMET (H-ADMET). H-ADMET incorporates the concept of self-supervised learning to produce a robust pre-trained model. The model is then fine-tuned with a multi-task and multi-stage framework to transfer knowledge between ADMET endpoints, auxiliary tasks, and self-supervised tasks. Our results demonstrate that H-ADMET achieves an overall improvement of 4%, compared with existing ADMET systems on comparable endpoints. Additionally, the pre-trained model provided by H-ADMET can be fine-tuned to generate new and customised ADMET endpoints, meeting various demands of drug research and development requirements.

## Key Methods

- pre-trained
- self-supervised