=== Paper 2205.08055v1 (alphaxiv full) ===

HelixADMET: a robust and endpoint extensible ADMET system
incorporating self-supervised knowledge transfer
Shanzhuo Zhang
1
, Zhiyuan Yan
1
, Yueyang Huang
1
, Lihang Liu
1
, Donglong He
1
, Wei Wang
3
, Xiaomin
Fang
1,
*, Xiaonan Zhang
1
, Fan Wang
1,
*, Hua Wu
2
, Haifeng Wang
2
1
Baidu International Technology (Shenzhen) Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China
2
Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Shenzhen, China
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: fangxiaomin01@baidu.com,
wangfan04@baidu.com
ABSTRACT
Accurate ADMET (an abbreviation for "absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity")
predictions can efficiently screen out undesirable drug candidates in the early stage of drug discovery.
In recent years, multiple comprehensive ADMET systems that adopt advanced machine learning
models have been developed, providing services to estimate multiple endpoints. However, those
ADMET systems usually suffer from weak extrapolation ability. First, due to the lack of labelled data for
each endpoint, typical machine learning models perform frail for the molecules with unobserved
scaffolds. Second, most systems only provide fixed built-in endpoints and cannot be customised to
satisfy various research requirements. To this end, we develop a robust and endpoint extensible
ADMET system, HelixADMET (H-ADMET). H-ADMET incorporates the concept of self-supervised
learning to produce a robust pre-trained model. The model is then fine-tuned with a multi-task and multi-
stage framework to transfer knowledge between ADMET endpoints, auxiliary tasks, and self-supervised
tasks. Our results demonstrate that H-ADMET achieves an overall improvement of 4%, compared with
existing ADMET systems on comparable endpoints. Additionally, the pre-trained model provided by H-
ADMET can be fine-tuned to generate new and customised ADMET endpoints, meeting various
demands of drug research and development requirements.
INTRODUCTION
The modern drug discovery process is extremely time-consuming and expensive, and yet, only 10-20%
of drug candidates can make it to the market (1, 2). The main reason for drug failure is usually the
unsatisfactory bioavailability and toxicity (3) due to undesirable pharmacokinetic (PK) and
pharmacodynamic (PD) properties. Therefore, accurately predicting PK/PD along with the absorption,
distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity (ADMET) can save both time and resources by filtering
out unfavourable drug candidates at the early stage of drug development (4). Since the 1950s,
medicinal chemists have been endeavouring to predict the aforementioned properties of candidate
molecules (5). These works formed a set of specialised methodologies of quantitative structure-activity
and structure-property relationships (QSAR and QSPR). Many of these methods are still highly
applicable these days, such as AlogP and ClogP (6).

Traditionally, the prediction of molecular ADMET properties is considered the field of
cheminformatics or medicinal chemistry (7–9). However, with the accumulation of massive data and
our knowledge on the sophisticated interconnection between chemical and biological process, it is more
and more recognized that a clear line shall not be drawn between the two fields (10). In fact, evaluation
of molecular ADMET properties benefit from biological data, especially those reveal how molecules
associate with clinical relevant endpoints (e.g., in vivo toxicity or side effects). This leads to a
convergence of goals, tools and techniques of cheminformatics and bioinformatics (11) and creates
needs to develop new models that fully utilise such combination of data from different domains.
Recent advances have shown great promise in applying machine learning techniques to mine the
pattern and correlations from physicochemical and bioactivity data (12). Several comprehensive
ADMET systems based on machine learning technology have been successfully developed to provide
a variety of endpoint estimations, including admetSAR 1.0/2.0 (13, 14) (in 2012/2019), swissADME (15)
(in 2017), vNN-ADMET (16) (in 2017), ADMETlab 1.0/2.0 (17, 18) (in 2018/2020), and FP-ADMET (19)
(in 2021). Most of these systems favour traditional machine learning models, such as support vector
machine (SVM), random forest (RF), and K-nearest neighbours (KNN), to estimate the molecular
properties, i.e., endpoints. For example, FP-ADMET was constructed with more than 20 different
molecular fingerprints as the input and RF as the machine learning model for over 50 ADMET endpoints.
On the other hand, with the success of deep learning in various domains, deep learning models,
especially graph neural networks (GNNs), have also been employed in ADMET prediction. admetSAR
2.0 applies a graph convolutional network (GCN) for building regression models, while ADMETlab 2.0
exploits an attention-based multi-task framework to train the model on multiple ADMET tasks
simultaneously. Besides the application on ADMET tasks, GNNs also achieve state-of-the-art
performance on large-scale molecular property prediction tasks maintained by the project of Open
Graph Benchmark (20). Compared with traditional machine learning models, GNNs have shown their
promise in ADMET prediction because they can encode molecules directly into graphs without the need
of handcrafted molecular descriptors.
Although the existing ADMET prediction systems and methods have made a big step forward in
technology, their extrapolation ability is still limited (21). First, there is a gap between the predictions of
the commonly used machine learning models and the true value obtained from laboratory experiments,
especially for molecules with unobserved scaffolds (core structures of molecules). The most important
reason for the weak robustness of these models is the scarcity of labelled data due to costly and time-
consuming laboratory evaluation. The scarcity of labels for ADMET endpoints makes sophisticated
machine learning models easily overfit the limited training data and hard to generalise to the molecules
with unobserved scaffolds. Second, even though the existing ADMET systems attempt to cover as many
prediction properties/endpoints as possible, it is unfeasible in manpower for a system with only the built-
in endpoints to fulfil all the prediction demands of drug researchers. Therefore, developing an ADMET
system with endpoint extensibility, on which the researchers can build custom endpoints, is of great
practical significance.

Recently, the technique of self-supervised learning (SSL) has proved its effectiveness in generating
better molecular representation from large-scale unlabelled data and promoting the robustness of
models. For example, Hu et al. (22) first proposed node-level and graph-level self-supervised tasks on
GNNs for the generation of better molecular representation; in our previous work, we proposed multiple
geometry-level SSL tasks to feed GNNs with molecular 3D spatial information (23). For the prediction
tasks with only a small amount of labelled data, a more accurate prediction can be obtained by fine-
tuning a model that has been pre-trained with large-scale self-supervised tasks. However, these works
only focus on a few molecular properties, rather than developing a comprehensive system.
To this end, we develop a web-based comprehensive ADMET system, namely HelixADMET (H-
ADMET, https://paddlehelix.baidu.com/app/drug/admet/train), to address the issue of weak
extrapolation ability by SSL. We design a three-stage training framework incorporating the concept of
self-supervised knowledge transfer. Self-supervised learning is utilised to learn general chemical
knowledge from a large-scale unlabelled dataset, combined with a wide assortment of supervised tasks,
to exploit the correlation among endpoints, auxiliary tasks, and self-supervised tasks. We evaluate the
models thoroughly and demonstrate that H-ADMET substantially outperforms other ADMET systems
with an improvement of 4%. H-ADMET can make excellent predictions even for the molecules with
unobserved scaffolds. Moreover, in addition to the 52 built-in endpoints, H-ADMET also provides a pre-
trained model, which can be fine-tuned with an external dataset to generate a highly accurate custom
endpoint. Through fine-tuning, H-ADMET can be efficiently extended to cover theoretically unlimited
endpoints and is expected to meet every specific drug research and development (R&D) requirement.
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION AND METHODS
ADMET profile
The ADMET profile, i.e., the endpoint selection of ADMET predictions, is constantly evolving. Overall,
the ADMET prediction is a broader term, including but not limited to the topics about “PK/PD” and “drug-
likeness prediction”. In terms of drug development practice, all early predictions that are expected to
reduce the risk of drug failure can be regarded as ADMET predictions. Therefore, compared to earlier
PK/PD studies, a modern ADMET system contains a wider range of prediction endpoints. The ADMET
endpoints provided by H-ADMET are shown in Figure 1. In particular, H-ADMET consists of 52
endpoints categorised into seven sections: a) physicochemical properties, b) medicinal chemistry, c)
absorption, d) distribution, e) metabolism, f) excretion, and g) toxicity. We selected these endpoints by
referring to multiple systems that are currently providing online ADMET prediction services, including
SwissADME, ADMETlab 1.0/2.0, admetSAR 1.0/2.0 (13–15, 17, 18). Two factors are considered when
selecting endpoints: 1) whether an endpoint is important in the early stage of drug development; 2)
whether sufficient and high-quality data for an endpoint can be found, which determines the accuracy
and robustness of the trained model. The details of data collections will be further discussed in the
following section.

Figure 1. The ADMET profile provided by H-ADMET. Detailed descriptions of the endpoints are introduced in
Supplementary Information.
There are some unique features in the design of toxicity endpoints of H-ADMET, as we notice that
the in vivo toxicity of a compound can be seen on multiple physiological levels. For example,
tetrodotoxin (TTX), one of the most potent natural toxins ever found, is a sodium channel blocker. It
prevents neurons from firing action potentials by binding to voltage-gated sodium channels in nerve cell
membranes and blocking the entering of sodium ions (which are important for the rising portion of an
action potential) into the neuron. This stops signals from reaching the neurological system, and
consequently muscles from contracting in response to nerve stimuli (24). The toxicity of TTX exhibits
on multiple physiological levels: on the subcellular level, TTX inhibits sodium ion channels; on the
cellular level, it prevents nerve and muscle cells from producing normal action potentials; on the organ
level, this inhibition of cell behaviour can paralyse muscles, blood vessels, etc.; on the body level, it
causes suffocation and death. Previous ADMET systems seldom consider the toxicity of compounds at
different levels. In contrast, we divided the toxicity endpoints into macro-toxicity and micro-toxicity. The
macro-toxicity includes the body and organ-level toxicity, while micro-toxicity includes cellular and sub-
cellular level toxicity. We hope that this classification provides more insights into the toxicology of
compounds to better assist drug development.
We adopted multiple approaches as models to make endpoint predictions. Some basic
physicochemical endpoints were calculated with RDKit (version 2021_09_3) (25), such as molecular
weight, number of heavy atoms, hydrogen-bond donor or acceptors, logP, etc. These basic endpoints
constituted the input for calculating drug-likeness rules of medicinal chemistry, such as the Lipinski rule-
of-five (26) and the Ghose and Veber rules (27, 28). The PAINS alert of medicinal chemistry defined

some special molecular sub-structures to filter out false-positive compounds (29), which was also
implemented by RDKit. More details about the algorithms of the above-mentioned endpoints can be
seen in Supplementary Information. For the remaining endpoints, we utilised machine learning models
that are trained on collected datasets and the details of which will be described in the following sections.
Data collection and processing
The collected data can be divided into two groups: unlabelled and labelled data. The large-scale
unlabelled data are used in the self-supervised tasks, while the labelled data are the collection for
ADMET, physicochemical endpoints, and other auxiliary bioactivity tasks used in the supervised tasks.
The data collection is made freely accessible, please refer to the Supplementary Information for more
details.
Unlabelled Data: The unlabelled data was extracted from the predefined drug-like subset in the
ZINC15 database (30). This drug-like subset contains nearly 1 billion compounds, and we randomly
selected 20 million compounds from the subset for self-supervised training. To the best of our
knowledge, it is the first time that the self-supervised pre-training technology has been applied on open-
accessed ADMET systems. The unlabelled dataset is also one of the largest ever used for ADMET
prediction.
Labelled Data: The labelled data for ADMET and physicochemical endpoints and the auxiliary tasks
was collected from various data sources, including DrugBank (31), ChEMBL (32), CPDB (33),
PubChem assays (34), peer-reviewed scientific papers (35–41), and high-throughput screening
projects such as Tox21 Data Challenge 2014 (42) (Tox21) and CYP450 (43). All compounds in the raw
data are transformed into canonical SMILES strings by RDKit. We first combined the data extracted
from various sources for each task, where special care was taken to ensure their experimental protocols,
test species are completely identical. Then, we checked the molecules to remove invalid or duplicated
ones (more details in Supplementary Information). We finally produced ADMET and physicochemical
datasets with more than 50 thousand data entries and the auxiliary datasets with more than 500
thousand data entries, respectively. The data collection was highly diverse and sufficiently large enough
to consider as a global dataset. Detailed statistics and scaffold analysis of our data collection are
provided in Supplementary Table 3 and Supplementary Table 4.
Training framework
GNNs, specifically LiteGEM (44) and GINE+ (45), are the main machine learning models in H-ADMET
(more details in Supplementary Information). The GNN models in H-ADMET are trained by a transfer
learning framework, which will be introduced in detail. Meanwhile, we also adopt the traditional machine
learning model RF as a complement in our system, whose performance has been verified in many other
systems (14, 17, 19).
GNNs have been successfully applied to molecular property prediction in our prev

[... truncated ...]
