=== Paper 2304.00970v1 (alphaxiv full) ===

Development and Evaluation of Conformal Prediction Methods for
QSAR
Yuting Xu
a
, Andy Liaw
a
, Robert P. Sheridan
b
, Vladimir Svetnik
a
a 
Biometrics Research, Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, New Jersey 07065, United States
b 
Computational and Structural Chemistry, Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, New Jersey 07033, United States
ABSTRACT
The quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) regression model is a commonly used tech-
nique for predicting biological activities of compounds using their molecular descriptors. Predic-
tions from QSAR models can help, for example, to optimize molecular structure; prioritize com-
pounds for further experimental testing; and estimate their toxicity. In addition to the accurate
estimation of the activity, it is highly desirable to obtain some estimate of the uncertainty associated
with the prediction, e.g., calculate a prediction interval (PI) containing the true molecular activity
with a pre-specified probability, say 70%, 90% or 95%. The challenge is that most machine learn-
ing (ML) algorithms that achieve superior predictive performance require some add-on methods for
estimating uncertainty of their prediction. The development of these algorithms is an active area
of research by statistical and ML communities but their implementation for QSAR modeling re-
mains limited. Conformal prediction (CP) is a promising approach. It is agnostic to the prediction
algorithm and can produce valid prediction intervals under some weak assumptions on the data dis-
tribution. We proposed computationally efficient CP algorithms tailored to the most advanced ML
models, including Deep Neural Networks and Gradient Boosting Machines. The validity and effi-
ciency of proposed conformal predictors are demonstrated on a diverse collection of QSAR datasets
as well as simulation studies.
Keywords: Conformal Prediction, Prediction Interval, Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship, Machine
Learning, Deep Learning, Deep Neural Networks, Random Forests, Gradient Boosting
1 Introduction
Quantitative structure–activity relationship (QSAR) regression models are routinely applied computational tools in the
drug discovery process for predicting the biological activities of molecules from the molecular structure-based features.
The predictions are usually used to prioritize candidate molecules for future experiments and help chemists gain better
understanding of how structural changes affect activities
1;2;3
. While most of the previous efforts focus on improving
the accuracy of point predictions, quantifying the uncertainty in the prediction will add valuable insight
4;5;6;7;8
. For
regression tasks, prediction intervals are often used as quantitative measures of the reliability or confidence in the point
prediction at a given probability. A well-calibrated prediction interval contains future observations with a prespecified
probability, which is also called nominal coverage. The width of a calibrated prediction interval gives users an intuitive
estimate of the prediction error magnitude, since a prespecified percent of the prediction errors is contained within the
interval range. For example, an interval of 2.0 to 3.0 at 95% probability for compound i means the true value of the
arXiv:2304.00970v1 [q-bio.BM] 3 Apr 2023

Development and Evaluation of Conformal Prediction Methods for QSAR
activity has a 95% chance of falling within 2 and 3. In comparison, a wider interval of 1.0 to 4.0 at 95% for compound
j would indicate that j is less reliably predicted than i.
There are a variety methods of estimating prediction uncertainties for QSAR predictions. Some methods directly es-
timate the quantile or variance of prediction errors, while others provide relative uncertainty scores between different
molecules which require further calibration for obtaining valid prediction intervals
6
. Quantile regression methods
9;10
have been explored with various QSAR algorithms, including Neural Networks
11
, Random Forests
12
, and Light Gra-
dient Boosting Machine
13
; however, the prediction intervals constructed from the quantile estimates often lead to an
under-coverage, i.e., the actual coverage of these intervals is smaller than that of the nominal coverage specified by
a user. The Bayesian methods estimate the posterior distribution of molecular activity given a molecular structure.
Thus, the prediction intervals could be computed using the variance of the prediction errors under certain assumption
of their distribution. An example of this approach is studied in Dai et al.
12
, the Bayesian Additive Regression Trees
that simultaneously estimate molecular activity and the error variance as a measure of prediction uncertainty, under
the assumption that the errors are normally distributed. This assumption, however, is often violated in many QSAR
applications. A practical concern with some methods is the high computational cost, which is especially high for
Bayesian methods. Hirschfeld et al.
6 
benchmarked several uncertainty quantification methods that are applicable to
Neural Networks, including ensemble-based methods
14;15
, distance-based methods, mean-variance estimation
16
, and
union-based methods
17
. This work recommended several top-performing methods that produced an estimate of the
predicted error variances with the lowest negative log likelihood under the Gaussian distribution assumption for pre-
diction errors. The likelihood-based evaluation metric, however, is highly sensitive to the distributional assumption.
As was mentioned above, prediction errors in many QSAR applications are non-Gaussian. The top recommended
methods in Hirschfeld et al.
6 
are union-based methods involving training a neural network for point prediction, and
a second model, for example, the Gaussian Process or Random Forest regression to estimate the variance of errors in
prediction produced by the first model. Training of two models typically requires substantially more data. Compre-
hensive reviews on uncertainty quantification methods and/or applications could be found in Mervin et al.
7
, Abdar et
al.
18
, Tian et al.
19 
and Yu et al.
8
.
We are seeking practical methods to provide prediction intervals accompanying the point predictions for large QSAR
datasets in an industrial-scale pharmaceutical drug discovery environment. A good algorithm should meet the follow-
ing requirements:
1. Marginal validity. The marginal coverage probability of the prediction interval should not be less than a
user-specified (nominal) coverage level. Marginal, is roughly understood as averaged over all molecules.
The empirical marginal coverage for a test set is the proportion of prediction intervals that contains these
molecules’ true activity measurements.
2. Conditional validity (informativeness, or adaptivity). The conditional coverage, i.e. prediction interval cov-
erage for each molecule, should be close to the nominal coverage. Roughly speaking, the width of the
prediction interval should closely follow the uncertainty in the prediction of any molecule. For example, with
a homoscedasticity where the variance of prediction errors does not depend on the molecular descriptors,
prediction intervals for all molecules will have the same width. In contrast, with heteroscedasticity, where the
variance depends on the descriptors, the width of the prediction interval should increase or decrease follow-
ing the variance. Compared to marginal validity, conditional validity is a much more stringent requirement
usually impossible to achieve. However, we still hope to have prediction intervals with sizes adaptive to the
prediction errors, in order to approximate this property.
3. Efficiency, or tightness of prediction intervals. The width (length, or size) of the prediction intervals should
be as small as possible.
4. Low computational cost. Preferably, the computation of prediction intervals should not involve a significant
computational effort in addition to training the point prediction model.
5. Independence of model or data distribution. The properties of the prediction intervals, such as validity, effi-
ciency, and adaptivity, do not depend on the choice of point prediction model and the probability distribution
of data or prediction errors.
2

Development and Evaluation of Conformal Prediction Methods for QSAR
Many evaluation metrics of prediction intervals have been explored in previous benchmark studies, and several rec-
ommendations have been proposed
20;21;6;19
. Although it is difficult to find a single method that is superior to others
under all criteria, the conformal prediction (CP) framework could satisfy most of these practical considerations and
has attracted increased attention in recent QSAR applications
22;23;24;25;26;14;27;15
. The prediction intervals generated
by conformal prediction methods are guaranteed to achieve valid marginal coverage, i.e. on average the test set pre-
diction intervals to contain the measured molecular activities with a user-specified probability, under the assumption
of data exchangeability
28;29
. This marginal validity property does not depend on any distributional assumptions or
model assumptions, and holds for any sample data size
30
. The conformal prediction is applied as a companion to
any pre-trained model for a QSAR regression task, and many conformal algorithms require little extra computational
costs besides the training of the underlying point predictor. Construction of conformal prediction intervals is based on
a “nonconformity” score that quantifies how unusual a data point is relative to the training data
31
. We prefer to use
nonconformity scores that do not require additional modeling efforts. The adaptivity property of prediction intervals
depends on the choice of nonconformity score. A theory for selecting the nonconformity score is yet to be developed,
and the choice needs to be evaluated with empirical studies. Several computationally efficient conformal prediction
algorithms have been developed for QSAR regression
26;14;15
, however, a comprehensive evaluation of their properties,
especially their adaptivity, i.e., ability to handle heteroscedasticity of prediction errors, remains to be done.
In this work, we develop a computationally efficient conformal prediction algorithm, named adaptive calibrated en-
semble (ACE) that is based on a specifically designed nonconformity score. The ACE algorithm can be used with any
model that provides both a point prediction and an uncertainty estimate for each molecule. For any ensemble-based
model, the mean prediction over the ensemble is the “prediction” (i.e. the point estimate) and the standard deviation of
predictions can be used as the prediction uncertainty estimate. The point estimate and prediction uncertainty estimate
are inputs for ACE. The ACE nonconformity score is computed from the point prediction and the data-driven trans-
formation of the prediction uncertainty score. If the uncertainty scores effectively represent the relative uncertainty
between molecules, the ACE prediction intervals would achieve not only a pre-specified marginal coverage but also
an approximate conditional coverage.
Deep neural nets (DNN) and Gradient Boosting models (GB) are among the most predictive descriptor-based ML
methods
32;33;34
. Our second contribution is to propose novel approaches for obtaining uncertainty estimates for these
methods, called DNN-multitask and GB-tail, respectively. DNN-multitask is compared to the state-of-the-art DNN-
dropout method
35;8
.
Our third contribution is a comprehensive analysis of a diverse collection of real QSAR datasets, and simulations
derived from it, with special attention to the analysis of conditional validity and efficiency.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes QSAR datasets and their molecular descriptors. In Section 3 we
briefly review the conformal prediction framework and applications to QSAR; introduce the proposed ACE conformal
prediction algorithm; define evaluation metrics and explain in detail how to get ensemble predictions or raw prediction
uncertainty scores for several state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms. Section 4.1 contains benchmarking results
obtained on simulated data with either homoscedastic or heteroscedastic errors. Section 4.2 presents the results of ap-
plying ACE jointly with several popular QSAR predictive algorithms, and shows the validity, efficiency and adaptivity
of proposed methods on diverse QSAR datasets.
2 Data Sets and Molecular Descriptors
Two sets of QSAR data collections are used in this study:
• ChEMBL: IC
50 
data sets for 23 diverse protein targets and receptors from the ChEMBL database. The
data sets were obtained from Cortes-Ciriano et. al.
14
, excluding the smallest dataset “A2a” with only 203
molecules. We generated molecular descriptors according to the procedures described in Cortes-Ciriano et
al.
15
: Compute the circular Morgan fingerprints
36 
using RDkit
37 
(version 2021.03.2) with the radius set to 2,
and the output fingerprint length is 2048.
3

Development and Evaluation of Conformal Prediction Methods for QSAR
• Kaggle: The 15 QSAR datasets used in the 2012 “Merck Molecular Activity Challenge” Kaggle competition
and released in Ma et al.
32
. These data sets are of various sizes for either on-target potency or off-target
absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME) activities. The molecular descriptor is the union
of the “atom pair” (AP) descriptors from Carhart et al.
38 
and “donor–acceptor pair” (DP) descriptors
39
. Each
data set was provided in two parts: the time-split training set and test set. In this work, we only use the
training set in each data set, since investigating the covariate-shift problem for time-split test set is out of
scope.
Compared to the ChEMBL collection, the Kaggle collection contains a mixture of easy and hard to predict tasks,
larger data sets, and more challenging distribution of activities. Figure 1 shows the distribution of the number of
unique features versus number of molecules in these two QSAR data collections. Figure 2 and Figure 3 contain the
distribution of molecular activities in each dataset.
Figure 1: Dimension of two groups of data sets
Due to the complex nature of QSAR datasets, the distribution of prediction errors is often unknown. Some data sets
may have near constant prediction error variance that is unrelated to molecular features. In this case, applying a
constant width prediction interval for all molecules (i.e. homoscedastic) is preferred. Other datasets may have varying
prediction error variance for different molecules, for example, higher randomness in experimental measurements for
more active compounds. In this case, prediction intervals with varying widths correlated with prediction errors (i.e.
heteroscedastic) are desirable. A good algorithm should provide adaptive prediction intervals suitable for both cases.
However, the two groups of QSAR datase

[... truncated ...]